<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter XV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Chapter</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</span>
			</h2>
			<p>Brent found himself in a most peculiar situation. He had hated the severe discipline of his youth, and had finally rebelled against it and renounced its results as far as they went materially. This he had thought to mean his emancipation. But when the hour to assert his freedom had come, he found that the long years of rigid training had bound his volition with iron bands. He was wrapped in a mantle of habit which he was ashamed to display and yet could not shake off. The pendulum never stops its swing in the middle of the arc. So he would have gone to the other extreme and revelled in the pleasures whose very breath had been forbidden to his youth; but he found his sensibilities revolting from everything that did not accord with the old Puritan code by which they had been trained. He knew himself to be full of capabilities for evil, but it seemed as if some power greater than his held him back. It was Frederick Brent who looked on sin abstractly, but its presence in the concrete was seen through the eyes of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hester Hodges. It could hardly be called the decree of conscience, because so instantaneous was the rejection of evil that there was really no time for reference to the internal monitor. The very restriction which he had complained of he was now putting upon himself. The very yoke whose burden he hated he was placing about his own neck. He had run away from the sound of “right” and “duty,” but had not escaped their power. He felt galled, humiliated, and angry with himself, because he had long seen the futility of blind indignation against the unseen force which impelled him forward in a hated path.</p>
			<p>One thing that distressed him was a haunting fear of the sights which Perkins would show him on the morrow’s night. He had seen enough for himself to conjecture of what nature they would be. He did not want to see more, and yet how could he avoid it? He might plead illness, but that would be a lie; and then there would be other nights to follow, so it would only be a postponement of what must ultimately take place or be boldly rejected. Once he decided to explain his feelings on the subject, but in his mind’s eye he saw the half-pitying sneer on the face of the worldly young cityite, and he quailed before it.</p>
			<p>Why not go? Could what he saw hurt him? Was he so great a coward that he dared not come into the way of temptation? We do not know the strength of a shield until it has been tried in battle. Metal does not ring true or false until it is struck. He would go. He would see with his own eyes for the purpose of information. He would have his boasted bout with sin. After this highly valorous conclusion he fell asleep.</p>
			<p>The next morning found him wavering again, but he put all his troubled thoughts away and spent the day in sightseeing. He came in at night tired and feeling strange and lonesome. “Whom the gods wish to destroy, they first make mad,” we used to say; but all that is changed now, and whom the devil wishes to get, he first makes lonesome. Then the victim is up to anything.</p>
			<p>Brent had finished his supper when Perkins came in, but he brightened at the young clerk’s cheery salute, “Hello, there! ready to go, are you?”</p>
			<p>“Been ready all day,” he replied, with a laugh. “It ‘s been pretty slow.”</p>
			<p>“ ‘Ain’t made much out, then, seeing the sights of this little village of ours? Well, we’ll do better tonight, if the people don’t see that black tie of yours and take you for a preacher getting facts for a crusade.”</p>
			<p>Brent blushed and bit his lip, but he only said, “I’ll go up and change it while you ‘re finishing your supper.”</p>
			<p>“Guess you ‘d better, or someone will be asking you for a sermon.” Perkins laughed good-naturedly, but he did not know how his words went home to his companion’s sensitive feelings. He thought that his haste in leaving the room and his evident confusion were only the evidence of a greenhorn’s embarrassment under raillery. He really had no idea that his comrade’s tie was the badge of his despised calling.</p>
			<p>Brent was down again in a few minutes, a grey cravat having superseded the offending black. But even now, as he compared himself with his guide, he appeared sombre and ascetic. His black Prince Albert coat showed up gloomy and oppressive against young Perkins’s natty drab cutaway relieved by a dashing red tie. From head to foot the little clerk was light and dapper; and as they moved along the crowded streets the preacher felt much as a conscious omnibus would feel beside a pneumatic-tired sulky.</p>
			<p>“You can talk all you want to about your Chicago,” Perkins was rattling on, “but you can bet your life Cincinnati ‘s the greatest town in the West. Chicago ‘s nothing but a big overgrown country town. Everything looks new and flimsy there to a fellow, but here you get something that ‘s solid. Chicago ‘s pretty swift, too, but there ain’t no flies on us, either, when it comes to the go.”</p>
			<p>Brent thought with dismay how much his companion knew, and felt a passing bitterness that he, though older, had seen none of these things.</p>
			<p>“Ever been in Chicago?” asked Perkins; “but of course you haven’t.” This was uttered in such a tone of conviction that the minister thought his greenness must be very apparent.</p>
			<p>“I ‘ve never been around much of anywhere,” he said. “I ‘ve been hard at work all my life.”</p>
			<p>“Eh, that so? You don’t look like you ‘d done much hard work. What do you do?”</p>
			<p>“I⁠—I⁠—ah⁠—write,” was the confused answer.</p>
			<p>Perkins, fortunately, did not notice the confusion. “Oh, ho!” he said: “do you go in for newspaper work?”</p>
			<p>“No, not for newspapers.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, you ‘re an author, a regular out-and-outer. Well, don’t you know, I thought you were somehow different from most fellows I ‘ve met. I never could see how you authors could stay away in small towns, where you hardly ever see anyone, and write about people as you do; but I suppose you get your people from books.”</p>
			<p>“No, not entirely,” replied Brent, letting the mistake go. “There are plenty of interesting characters in a small town. Its life is just what the life of a larger city is, only the scale is smaller.”</p>
			<p>“Well, if you ‘re on a search for characters, you’ll see some tonight that’ll be worth putting in your notebook. We’ll stop here first.”</p>
			<p>The place before which they had stopped was surrounded by a high vine-covered lattice fence: over the entrance flamed forth in letters set with gaslights the words “Meyer’s Beer-Garden and Variety Hall. Welcome.” He could hear the sound of music within⁠—a miserable orchestra, and a woman singing in a high strident voice. People were passing in and out of the place. He hesitated, and then, shaking himself, as if to shake off his scruples, turned towards the entrance. As he reached the door, a man who was standing beside it thrust a paper into his hand. He saw others refuse to take it as they passed. It was only the announcement of a temperance meeting at a neighbouring hall. He raised his eyes to find the gaze of the man riveted upon him.</p>
			<p>“Don’t you go in there, young man,” he said. “You don’t look like you was used to this life. Come away. Remember, it ‘s the first step⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Chuck him,” said Perkins’s voice at his elbow. But something in the man’s face held him. A happy thought struck him. He turned to his companion and said, in a low voice, “I think I ‘ve found a character here already. Will you excuse me for a while?”</p>
			<p>“Certainly. Business before pleasure. Pump him all you can, and then come in. You’ll find me at one of the tables on the farther side.” Perkins passed on.</p>
			<p>“You won’t go in, my young friend?” said the temperance man.</p>
			<p>“What is it to you whether I go in or stay out?” asked Brent, in a tone of assumed carelessness.</p>
			<p>“I want to keep every man I kin from walkin’ the path that I walked and sufferin’ as I suffer.” He was seized with a fit of coughing. His face was old and very thin, and his hands, even in that hot air, were blue as with cold. “I wisht you ‘d go to our meetin’ tonight. We ‘ve got a powerful speaker there, that’ll show you the evils of drink better ‘n I kin.”</p>
			<p>“Where is this great meeting?” Brent tried to put a sneer into his voice, but an unaccountable tremor ruined its effect.</p>
			<p>He was duly directed to the hall. “I may come around,” he said, carelessly, and sauntered off, leaving the man coughing beside the door of the beer-garden. “Given all of his life to the devil,” he mused, “drunk himself to death, and now seeking to steal into heaven by giving away a few tracts in his last worthless moments.” He had forgotten all about Perkins.</p>
			<p>He strolled about for a while, and then, actuated by curiosity, sought out the hall where the meeting was being held. It was a rude place, in a poor neighbourhood. The meeting-room was up two flights of dingy, rickety stairs. Hither Brent found his way. His acquaintance of the street was there before him and sitting far to the front among those whom, by their position, the young man took to be the speakers of the evening. The room was half full of the motleyest crew that it had ever been his ill fortune to set eyes on. The flaring light of two lard-oil torches brought out the peculiarities of the queer crowd in fantastic prominence. There was everywhere an odour of work, but it did not hang chiefly about the men. The women were mostly little weazen-faced creatures, whom labour and ill treatment had rendered inexpressibly hideous. The men were chiefly of the reformed. The bleared eyes and bloated faces of some showed that their reformation must have been of very recent occurrence, while a certain unsteadiness in the conduct of others showed that with them the process had not taken place at all.</p>
			<p>It was late, and a stuffy little man with a wheezy voice and a very red nose was holding forth on the evils of intemperance, very much to his own satisfaction evidently, and unmistakably to the weariness of his audience. Brent was glad when he sat down. Then there followed experiences from women whose husbands had been drunkards and from husbands whose wives had been similarly afflicted. It was all thoroughly uninteresting and commonplace.</p>
			<p>The young man had closed his eyes, and, suppressing a yawn, had just determined to go home, when he was roused by a new stir in the meeting, and the voice of the wheezy man saying “And now, brothers, we are to have a great treat: we are to hear the story of the California Pilgrim, told by himself. Bless the Lord for his testimony! Go on, my brother.” Brent opened his eyes and took in the scene. Beside the chairman stood the emaciated form of his chance acquaintance. It was the man’s face, now seen in the clearer light, that struck him. It was thin, very thin, and of a deathly pallor. The long grey hair fell in a tumbled mass above the large hollow eyes. The cheekbones stood up prominently, and seemed almost bursting through the skin. His whole countenance was full of the terrible, hopeless tragedy of a ruined life. He began to speak.</p>
			<p>“I’ ll have to be very brief, brothers and sisters, as I haven’t much breath to spare. But I will tell you my life simply, in order to warn any that may be in the same way to change their course. Twenty years ago I was a hard-workin’ man in this State. I got along fairly, an’ had enough to live on an’ keep my wife an’ baby decent. Of course I took my dram like the other workmen, an’ it never hurt me. But some men can’t stand what others kin, an’ the habit commenced to grow on me. I took a spree, now an’ then, an’ then went back to work, fur I was a good hand, an’ could always git somethin’ to do. After a while I got so unsteady that nobody would have me. From then on it was the old story. I got discouraged, an’ drunk all the more. Three years after I begun, my home was a wreck, an’ I had ill-treated my wife until she was no better than I was; then she got a divorce from me, an’ I left the town. I wandered from place to place, sometimes workin’, always drinkin’; sometimes ridin’ on trains, sometimes trampin’ by the roadside. Fin’lly I drifted out to Californy, an’ there I spent most o’ my time until, a year ago, I come to see myself what a miserable bein’ I was. It was through one of your Bands of Hope. From then I pulled myself up; but it was too late. I had ruined my health. I started for my old home, talkin’ and tellin’ my story by the way. I want to get back there an’ jest let the people know that I ‘ve repented, an’ then I can die in peace. I want to see ef my wife an’ child⁠—” Here a great fit of coughing seized him again, and he was forced to sit down.</p>
			<p>Brent had listened breathlessly to every word: a terrible fear was clutching at his heart. When the man sat down, he heard the voice of the chairman saying, “Now let us all contribute what we can to help the brother on his journey; he hasn’t far to go. Come forward and lay your contributions on the table here, now. Someone sing. Now who ‘s going to help Brother Brent?”</p>
			<p>The young man heard the name. He grasped the seat in front of him for support. He seized his hat, staggered to his feet, and stumbled blindly out of the room and down the stairs.</p>
			<p>“Drunk” said someone as he passed.</p>
			<p>He rushed into the street, crying within himself, “My God! my God!” He hurried through the crowds, thrusting the people right and left and unheeding the curses that followed him. He reached home and groped up to his room.</p>
			<p>“Awful!” murmured <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jones. “He seemed such a good young man; but he ‘s been out with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Perkins, and men will be men.”</p>
			<p>Once in his room, it seemed that he would go mad. Back and forth he paced the floor, clenching his hands and smiting his head. He wanted to cry out. He felt the impulse to beat his head against the wall. “My God! my God! It was my father,” he cried, “going back home. What shall I do?” There was yet no pity in his heart for the man whom he now knew to be his parent. His only thought was of the bitterness that parent’s folly had caused. “Oh, why could he not have died away from home, without going back there to revive all the old memories? Why must he go back there just at this troublous time to distress those who have loved me and help those who hate me to drag my name in the dust? He has chosen his own way, and it has ever been apart from me. He has neglected and forgotten me. Now why does he seek me out, after a life spent among strangers? I do not want him. I will not see him again. I shall never go home. I have seen him, I have heard him talk. I have stood near him and talked with him, and just when I am leaving it all behind me, all my past of sorrow and degradation, he comes and lays a hand upon me, and I am more the son of Tom Brent tonight than ever before. Is it Fate, God, or the devil that pursues me so?”</p>
			<p>His passion was spending itself. When he was more calm he thought, “He will go home with a religious testimony on his lips, he will die happy, and the man who has spent all his days in drunkenness, killed his wife, and damned his son will be preached through the gates of glory on the strength of a few words of familiar cant.” There came into his mind a great contempt for the system which taught or preached so absurd and unfair a doctrine. “I wish I could go to the other side of the world,” he said, “and live among heathens who know no such dreams. I, Frederick Brent, son of Tom Brent, temperance advocate, sometime drunkard and wife-beater.” There was terrible, scorching irony in the thought. There was a pitiless hatred in his heart for his father’s very name.</p>
			<p>“I suppose,” he went on, “that Uncle ‘Liph”⁠—he said the name tenderly⁠—“has my letter now and will be writing to me to come home and hear my father’s dying words, and receive perhaps his dying blessing⁠—his dying blessing! But I will not go; I will not go back.” Anger, mingled with shame at his origin and a greater shame at himself, flamed within him. “He did not care for the helpless son sixteen years ago: let him die without the sight of the son now. His life has cursed my life, his name has blasted my name, his blood has polluted my blood. Let him die as he lived⁠—without me.”</p>
			<p>He dropped into a chair and struck the table with his clenched fists.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jones came to the door to ask him not to make so much noise. He buried his face in his hands, and sat there thinking, thinking, until morning.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
