<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><span epub:type="label">Chapter</span> <span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span></h2>
			<p>Cynics and fools laugh at calf-love. Youth, which is wiser, treats it more seriously. When the boy begins to think of a girl, instead of girls, he displays the first budding signs of a real growing manhood. The first passion may be but the enthusiasm of discovery. Sometimes it is not. At times it dies, as fleeting enthusiasms do. Again it lives, and becomes a blessing, a curse, or a memory. Who shall say that the first half-sweet pang that strikes a boy’s heart in the presence of the dear first girl is any less strong, intoxicating, and real to him than that which prompts him to take the full-grown woman to wife? With factitious sincerity we quote, “The boy is father to the man,” and then refuse to believe that the qualities, emotions, and passions of the man are inherited from this same boy⁠—are just the growth, the development, of what was embryonic in him.</p>
			<p>Nothing is more serious, more pleasant, and more diverting withal, than a boy’s brooding or exultation⁠—one is the complement of the other⁠—over his first girl. As, to a great extent, a man is moulded by the woman he marries, so to no less a degree is a boy’s character turned and shaped by the girl he adores. Either he descends to her level, or she draws him up, unconsciously, perhaps, to her own plane. Girls are missionaries who convert boys. Boys are mostly heathens. When a boy has a girl, he remembers to put on his cuffs and collars, and he doesn’t put his necktie into his pocket on the way to school.</p>
			<p>In a boy’s life, the having of a girl is the setting up of an ideal. It is the new element, the higher something which abashes the unabashed, and makes John, who caused Henry’s nose to bleed, tremble when little Mary stamps her foot. It is like an atheist’s finding God, the sudden recognition of a higher and purer force against which all that he knows is powerless. Why doesn’t John bully Mary? It would be infinitely easier than his former exploit with Henry. But he doesn’t. He blushes in her presence, brings her the best apples, out of which heretofore he has enjoined the boys not to “take a hog-bite,” and, even though the parental garden grow none, comes by flowers for her in some way, queer boyish bouquets where dandelions press shoulders with spring-beauties, daffodils, and roses⁠—strange democracy of flowerdom. He feels older and stronger.</p>
			<p>In Fred’s case the object of adoration was no less a person than Elizabeth Simpson, the minister’s daughter. From early childhood they had seen and known each other at school, and between them had sprung up a warm childish friendship, apparently because their ways home lay along the same route. In such companionship the years sped; but Fred was a diffident boy, and he was seventeen and Elizabeth near the same before he began to feel those promptings which made him blushingly offer to carry her book for her as far as he went. She had hesitated, refused, and then assented, as is the manner of her sex and years. It had become a settled thing for them to walk home together, he bearing her burdens, and doing for her any other little service that occurred to his boyish sense of gallantry.</p>
			<p>Without will of his own, and without returning the favour, he had grown in the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Simpson’s esteem. This was due mostly to his guardian’s excellent work. In spite of his rebellion, training and environment had brought him greatly under her control, and when she began to admonish him about his lost condition spiritually she had been able to awaken a sort of superstitious anxiety in the boy’s breast. When Miss Prime perceived that this had been accomplished, she went forthwith to her pastor and unburdened her heart.</p>
			<p>“Brother Simpson,” said she, “I feel that the Lord has appointed me an instrument in His hands for bringin’ a soul into the kingdom.” The minister put the tips of his fingers together and sighed piously and encouragingly. “I have been labourin’ with Freddie in the sperrit of Christian industry, an’ I believe that I have finally brought him to a realisin’ sense of his sinfulness.”</p>
			<p>“H’m-m,” said the minister. “Bless the Lord for this evidence of the activity of His people. Go on, sister.”</p>
			<p>“Freddie has at last come to the conclusion that hell is his lot unless he flees unto the mountain and seeks salvation.”</p>
			<p>“Bless the Lord for this.”</p>
			<p>“Now, Brother Simpson, I have done my part as fur as the Lord has showed me, except to ask you to come and wrastle with that boy.”</p>
			<p>“Let not thy heart be troubled, Sister Prime, for I will come as you ask me, and I will wrastle with that boy as Jacob did of old with the angel.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Brother Simpson, I knowed you ‘d come. I know jest how you feel about pore wanderin’ souls, an’ I ‘m so glad to have yore strong arm and yore wisdom a-helpin’ me.”</p>
			<p>“I hope, my sister, that the Lord may smile upon my poor labours, and permit us to snatch this boy as a brand from eternal burning.”</p>
			<p>“We shall have to labour in the sperrit, Brother Simpson.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, and with the understanding of the truth in our hearts and minds.”</p>
			<p>“I ‘m shore I feel mighty uplifted by comin’ here today. Do come up to dinner Sunday, dear Brother Simpson, after preachin’.”</p>
			<p>“I will come, Sister Prime, I will come. I know by experience the worth of the table which the Lord provides for you, and then at the same season I may be able to sound this sinful boy as to his spiritual state and to drop some seed into the ground which the Lord has mercifully prepared for our harvest. Goodbye, sister, goodbye. I shall not forget, Sunday after preaching.”</p>
			<p>In accordance with his promise, the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Simpson began to labour with Fred, with the result of driving him into a condition of dogged revolt, which only Miss Prime’s persistence finally overcame. When revival time came round, as, sure as death it must come, Fred regularly went to the mourners’ bench, mourned his few days until he had worked himself into the proper state, and then, somewhat too coldly, it is true, for his anxious guardian, “got religion.”</p>
			<p>On the visit next after this which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Simpson paid to Miss Prime, he took occasion to say, “Ah, my sister, I am so glad that you pointed me to that lost lamb of the house of Israel, and I am thanking the Maker every day that He blessed my efforts to bring the straying one into the fold. Ah, there is more joy over the one lamb that is found than over the ninety and nine that went not astray!”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Simpson’s parishioner acquiesced, but she had some doubts in her mind as to whose efforts the Lord had blessed. She felt a little bit selfish. She wanted to be the author of everything good that came to Fred. But she did not argue with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Simpson. There are some concessions which one must make to one’s pastor.</p>
			<p>From this time on the preacher was Fred’s friend, and plied him with good advice in the usual friendly way; but the boy bore it well, for Elizabeth smiled on him, and what boy would not bear a father’s tongue for a girl’s eyes?</p>
			<p>The girl was like her mother, dark and slender and gentle. She had none of her father’s bigness or bumptiousness. Her eyes were large and of a shade that was neither black nor brown. Her hair was very decidedly black. Her face was small, and round with the plumpness of youth, but one instinctively felt, in looking at it, that its lines might easily fall into thinness, even pitifulness, at the first touch of woman’s sorrow. She was not, nor did she look to be, a strong girl. But her very weakness was the source of secret delight to the boy, for it made him feel her dependence on him. When they were together and some girlish fear made her cling to his arm, his heart swelled with pride and a something else that he could not understand and could not have described. Had anyone told him that he was going through the half-sweet, half-painful, timid, but gallant first stages of love, he would have resented the imputation with blushes. His whole training would have made him think of such a thing with terror. He had learned never to speak of girls at home, for any reference to them by him was sure to bring forth from Miss Prime an instant and strong rebuke.</p>
			<p>“Freddie,” was the exclamation that gave his first unsuspecting remarks pause, “you ‘re a-gittin’ too fresh: you ‘d better be a-mindin’ of yore studies, instead o’ thinkin’ about girls. Girls ain’t a-goin’ to make you pass yore examination, an’, besides, you ‘re a-gettin’ mannish; fur boys o’ yore age to be a-talkin’ about girls is mannish, do you hear, sir? You ‘re a-beginnin’ to feel yore keepin’ too strong. Don’t let me hear no more sich talk out o’ you.”</p>
			<p>There never was a manly boy in the world whom the word “mannish,” when applied to him, did not crush. It is a horrid word, nasty and full of ugly import. Fred was subdued by it, and so kept silence about his female friends. Happy is the boy who dares at home to pour out his heart about the girls he knows and likes, and thrice unhappy he who through mistaken zeal on the part of misguided parents is compelled to keep his thoughts in his heart and brood upon his little aproned companions as upon a secret sin. Two things are thereby engendered, stealth and unhealth. If Fred escaped certain youthful pitfalls, it was because he was so repressed that he had learned to hide himself from himself, his thoughts from the mind that produced them.</p>
			<p>He was a boy strong and full of blood. The very discipline that had given a gloomy cast to his mind had given strength and fortitude to his body. He was austere, because austerity was all that he had ever known or had a chance of knowing; but too often austerity is but the dam that holds back the flood of potential passion. Not to know the power which rages behind the barricade is to leave the structure weak for a hapless day when, carrying all before it, the flood shall break its bonds and in its fury ruin fair field and smiling mead. It was well for Fred Brent that the awakening came when it did.</p>
			<p>In the first days of June, when examina tions are over, the annual exhibition done, and the graduating class has marched away proud in the possession of its diplomas, the minds of all concerned turn naturally towards the old institution, the school picnic. On this occasion parents join the teachers and pupils for a summer day’s outing in the woods. Great are the preparations for the festal day, and great the rejoicings thereon. For these few brief hours old men and women lay aside their cares and their dignity and become boys and girls again. Those who have known sorrow⁠—and who has not?⁠—take to themselves a day of forgetfulness. Great baskets are loaded to overflowing with the viands dear to the picnicker’s palate⁠—sandwiches whose corpulence would make their sickly brothers of the railway restaurant wither with envy, pies and pickles, cheese and crackers, cakes and jams galore. Old horses that, save for this day, know only the market-cart or the Sunday chaise, are hitched up to bear out the merry loads. Old wagons, whose wheels have known no other decoration than the mud and clay of rutty roads, are festooned gaily with cedar wreaths, oak leaves, or the gaudy tissue-paper rosettes, and creak joyfully on their mission of lightness and mirth. On foot, by horse, in wagon or cart, the crowds seek some neighbouring grove, and there the day is given over to laughter, mirth, and song. The children roll and tumble on the sward in the intoxication of “swing-turn” and “ring-around-a-rosy.” The young women, with many blushes and shy glances, steal off to quiet nooks with their imploring swains. Some of the elders, anxious to prove that they have not yet lost all their youth and agility, indulge, rather awkwardly perhaps, in the exhausting amusement of the jumping-rope. A few of the more staid walk apart in conversation with some favourite pastor who does not decline to take part in the innocent pleasures and crack ponderous jokes for the edification of his followers. Perhaps some of the more daring are engaged in one of the numerous singing plays, such as “Oh, la, Miss Brown,” or “Swing Candy, Two and Two,” but these are generally frowned upon: they are too much like dancing, and time has been when some too adventurous church-member has been “churched” for engaging in one.</p>
			<p>In such a merrymaking was the community which surrounded the high school at Dexter engaged when the incident occurred which opened Fred’s eyes to his own state. Both he and Elizabeth had been in the prize ranks that year, and their friends had turned out in full and made much of them. Even Eliphalet Hodges was there, with old Bess festooned as gaily as the other horses, and both Miss Prime and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Simpson were in evidence. The afternoon of the day was somewhat advanced, the dinner had been long over, and the weariness of the people had cast something of a quietus over the hilarity of their sports. They were sitting about in groups, chatting and laughing, while the tireless children were scurrying about in games of “tag,” “catcher,” and “hide-and-seek.”</p>
			<p>The grove where the festivities were being held was on a hillside which sloped gently to the bank of a small, narrow stream, usually dry in summer; but now, still feeling the force of the spring freshets, and swollen by the rain of the day before, it was rushing along at a rapid rate. A fence divided the picnic-ground proper from the sharper slope of the rivulet’s bank. This fence the young people had been warned not to pass, and so no danger was apprehended on account of the stream’s overflowing condition. But the youngsters at Dexter were no more obedient than others of their age elsewhere. So when a scream arose from several childish voices at the lower part of the hill, everybody knew that some child had been disobeying, and, pell-mell, the picnickers rushed in the direction of the branch.</p>
			<p>When they reached the nearest point from which they could see the stream, a terrifying sight met their eyes. A girl was struggling in the shallow but swift water. She had evidently stepped on the sloping bank and fallen in. Her young companions were running alongside the rivulet, stretching out their hands helplessly to her, but the current was too strong, and, try as she would, she could not keep her feet. A cry of grief and despair went up from the girls on the bank, as she made one final effort and then fell and was carried down by the current.</p>
			<p>Men were leaping the fence now, but a boy who had seen the whole thing from a neighbouring hillock was before them. Fred Brent came leaping down the hill like a young gazelle. He had seen who the unfortunate girl was⁠—Elizabeth⁠—and he had but one desire in his heart, to save her. He reached the bank twenty yards ahead of anyone else, and plunged into the water just in front of her, for she was catching and slipping, clinging and losing hold, but floating surely to her death. He struggled up stream, reached and caught her by the dress. The water tugged at him and tried to throw him over, but he stemmed it, and, lifting her up in his arms, fought his way manfully to the bank. Up this he faltered, slipping and sliding in the wet clay, and weak with his struggle against the strong current. But his face was burning and his blood tingling as he held the girl close to him till he gave her unconscious form into her father’s arms.</p>
			<p>For the moment all was confusion, as was natural when a preacher’s daughter was so nearly drowned. The crowd clustered around and gave much advice and some restoratives. Some unregenerate, with many apologies and explanations concerning his possession, produced a flask, and part of the whisky was forced down the girl’s throat, while her hands and face and feet were chafed. She opened her eyes at last, and a fervent “Thank God!” burst from her father’s lips and called forth a shower of Amens.</p>
			<p>“I allus carry a little somethin’ along, in case of emergencies,” explained the owner of the flask as he returned it to his pocket, with a not altogether happy look at its depleted contents.</p>
			<p>As soon as Fred saw that Elizabeth was safe, he struck away for home, unobserved, and without waiting to hear what the crowd were saying. He heard people calling his name kindly and admiringly, but it only gave wings to the feet that took him away from them. If he had thrown the girl in instead of bringing her out, he could not have fled more swiftly or determinedly away from the eyes of people. Tired and footsore, drenched to the skin and chilled through, he finally reached home. He was trembling, he was crying, but he did not know it, and had he known, he could not have told why. He did not change his clothes, but crouched down in a corner and hid his face in his hands. He dreaded seeing anyone or hearing any person speak his name. He felt painfully conscious of a new self, which he thought must be apparent to other eyes.</p>
			<p>The accident of the afternoon had cast a gloom over the merrymakings, and, the picnic breaking up abruptly, sent the people scurrying home, so that Miss Prime was at the house not far behind her charge.</p>
			<p>“Freddie,” she called to him as she entered the house, “Freddie, where air you?” And then she found him. She led him out of the corner and looked him over with a scrutinising eye. “Freddie Brent,” she said solemnly, “you ‘ve jest ruined yore suit.” He was glad. He wanted to be scolded. “But,” she went on, “I don’t care ef you have.” And here she broke down. “You ‘re a-goin’ to have another one, fur you ‘re a right smart boy, that ‘s all I ‘ve got to say.” For a moment he wanted to lay his head on her breast and give vent to the sob which was choking him. But he had been taught neither tenderness nor confidence, so he choked back the sob, though his throat felt dry and hot and strained. He stood silent and embarrassed until Miss Prime recovered herself and continued: “But la, child, you’ll take yore death o’ cold. Git out o’ them wet things an’ git into bed, while I make you some hot tea. Fur the life o’ me, I never did see sich carryin’s-on.”</p>
			<p>The boy was not sorry to obey. He was glad to be alone. He drank the warm tea and tried to go to sleep, but he could not. His mind was on fire. His heart seemed as if it would burst from his bosom. Something new had come to him. He began to understand, and blushed because he did understand. It was less discovery than revelation. His forehead was hot. His temples were throbbing. It was well that Miss Prime did not discover it: she would have given him horehound to cure⁠—thought!</p>
			<p>From the moment that the boy held the form of the girl to his heart he was changed, and she was changed to him. They could never be the same to each other again. Manhood had come to him in a single instant, and he saw in her womanhood. He began for the first time to really know himself, and it frightened him and made him ashamed.</p>
			<p>He drew the covers over his head and lay awake, startled, surprised at what he knew himself and mankind to be.</p>
			<p>To Fred Brent the awakening had come⁠—early, if we would be prudish; not too early, if we would be truthful.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
