<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h2>
			<p>Bedside an absolute refusal again to supply, Brent made no sign of the rebellion which was in him, and his second year slipped quickly and uneventfully away. He went to and from his duties silent and self-contained. He did not confide in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Hodges, because his guardian seemed to grow more and more jealous of their friendship. He could not confide in Elizabeth, on account of a growing conviction that she did not fully sympathise with him. But his real feelings may be gathered from a letter which he wrote to his friend Taylor some two months after the events recorded in the last chapter.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>“<span epub:type="z3998:salutation">My dear Taylor</span>,” it ran, “time and again I have told myself that I would write you a line, keeping you in touch, as I promised, with my progress. Many times have I thought of our last talk together, and still I think as I thought then⁠—that, in spite of all your disadvantages and your defeats, you have the best of it. When you fail, it is your own failure, and you bear down with you only your own hopes and struggles and ideals. If I fail, there falls with me all the framework of pride and anxiety that has so long pushed me forward and held me up. For my own failure I should not sorrow: my concern would be for the one who has so carefully shaped me after a pattern of her own. However else one may feel, one must be fair to the ambitions of others, even though one is the mere material that is heated and beaten into form on the anvil of another’s will. But I am ripe for revolt. The devil is in me⁠—a restrained, quiet, well-appearing devil, but all the more terrible for that.</p>
				<p>“I have at last supplied one of the pulpits here, that of my own church. The <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Simpson was afflicted with a convenient and adaptable indisposition which would not allow him to preach, and I was deputed to fill his place. I knew what a trial it would be, and had carefully written out my sermon, but I am afraid I did not adhere very strictly to the manuscript. I think I lost my head. I know I lost my temper. But the sermon was a nine days’ wonder, and I have had to refuse a dozen subsequent offers to supply. It is all very sordid and sickening and theatrical. The good old Lowry tried to show me that it was my duty and for my good, but I have set my foot down not to supply again, and so they let me alone now.</p>
				<p>“It seems to me that that one sermon forged a chain which holds me in a position that I hate. It is a public declaration that I am or mean to be a preacher, and I must either adhere to it or break desperately away. Do you know, I feel myself to be an arrant coward. If I had half the strength that you have, I should have been out of it long ago; but the habit of obedience grows strong upon a man.</p>
				<p>“There is but one crowning act to be added to this drama of deceit and infamy⁠—my ordination. I know how all the other fellows are looking forward to it, and how, according to all the prescribed canons, I should view the momentous day; but I am I. Have you ever had one of those dreams where a huge octopus approaches you slowly but certainly, enfolding you in his arms and twining his horrid tentacles about your helpless form? What an agony of dread you feel! You try to move or cry out, but you cannot, and the arms begin to embrace you and draw you towards the great body. Just so I feel about the day of the ceremony that shall take me into the body of which I was never destined to be a member.</p>
				<p>“Are you living in a garret? Are you subsisting on a crust? Happy, happy fellow! But, thank God, the ordination does not take place until next year, and perhaps in that time I may find some means of escape. If I do not, I know that I shall have your sympathy; but don’t express it.</p>
				<footer role="presentation">
					<p><span epub:type="z3998:valediction">Ever sincerely yours</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Brent</span>.”</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>But the year was passing, and nothing happened to release him. He found himself being pushed forward at the next term with unusual rapidity, but he did not mind it; the work rather gave him relief from more unpleasant thoughts. He went at it with eagerness and mastered it with ease. His fellow-students looked on him with envy, but he went on his way unheeding and worked for the very love of being active, until one day he understood.</p>
			<p>It was nearing the end of the term when a fellow-student remarked to him, “Well, Brent, it isn’t every man that could have done it, but you’ll get your reward in a month or so now.”</p>
			<p>“What do you mean?” asked Brent. “Done what?”</p>
			<p>“Now don’t be modest,” rejoined the other; “I am really glad to see you do it. I have no envy.”</p>
			<p>“Really, Barker, I don’t understand you.”</p>
			<p>“Why, I mean you are finishing two years in one.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, pshaw! it will hardly amount to that.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, well, you will get in with the senior class men.”</p>
			<p>“Get in with the senior class!”</p>
			<p>“It will be kind of nice, a year before your time, to be standing in the way of any appointive plums that may happen to fall; and then you don’t have to go miles away from home before you can be made a full-fledged shepherd. Well, here is my hand on it anyway.”</p>
			<p>Brent took the proffered hand in an almost dazed condition. It had all suddenly flashed across his mind, the reason for his haste and his added work. What a blind fool he had been!</p>
			<p>The Church Conference met at Dexter that year, and they had hurried him through in order that he might be ready for ordination thereat.</p>
			<p>Alleging illness as an excuse, he did not appear at recitation that day. The shock had come too suddenly for him. Was he thus to be entrapped? Could he do nothing? He felt that ordination would bind him forever to the distasteful work. He had only a month in which to prevent it. He would do it. From that day he tried to fall gradually back in his work; but it was too late; the good record which he had unwittingly piled up carried him through, <span xml:lang="la">nolens volens</span>.</p>
			<p>The week before Conference met, Frederick Brent, residing at Dexter, by special request of the faculty, was presented as a candidate for ordination. Even his enemies in the community said, “Surely there is something in that boy.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hester Hodges was delighted. She presented him with his ordination suit, and altogether displayed a pride and pleasure that almost reconciled the young man to his fate. In the days immediately preceding the event she was almost tender with him, and if he had been strong enough to make a resolve inimical to her hopes, the disappointment which he knew failure would bring to her would have greatly weakened it.</p>
			<p>Now, Conference is a great event in the circles of that sect of which Cory Chapel was a star congregation, and the town where it convenes, or “sets,” as the popular phrase goes, is an honoured place. It takes upon itself an air of unusual bustle. There is a great deal of housecleaning, hanging of curtains, and laying of carpets, just prior to the time. People from the rural parts about come into town and settle for the week. Ministers and lay delegates from all the churches in the district, comprising perhaps half of a large State or parts of two, come and are quartered upon the local members of the connection. For two weeks beforehand the general question that passes from one housewife to another is, “How many and whom are you going to take?” Many are the heartburnings and jealousies aroused by the disposition of some popular preacher whom a dozen members of the flock desire to entertain, while the less distinguished visitors must bide their time and be stuck in when and where they may. The “big guns” of the Church are all present, and all the “little guns” are scattered about them, popping and snapping every time a “big gun” booms.</p>
			<p>But of all the days of commotion and excitement, the climax is ordination day, when candidates for the ministry, college students, and local preachers are examined and either rejected or admitted to the company of the elect. It is common on that day for some old dignitary of the church, seldom a less person than the president of the Conference himself, to preach the sermon. Then, if the fatted calf is not killed, at least the fatted fowls are, and feasting and rejoicing rule the occasion.</p>
			<p>This ordination day was no exception. A class of ten stood up before the examining committee and answered the questions put to them. Among them stood Frederick Brent. He wished, he tried, to fail in his answers and be rejected, even though it meant disgrace; but, try as he would, he could not. Force of habit was too strong for him; or was it that some unseen and relentless power was carrying him on and on against his will? He clinched his hands; the beads of perspiration broke out on his brow; but ever as the essential questions came to him his tongue seemed to move of its own volition, without command from the brain, and the murmurs of approval told him that he was answering aright. Never did man struggle harder for brilliant success than this one for ignominious failure. Then some whisper in his consciousness told him that it was over. He felt the laying of hands upon his head. He heard the old minister saying, “Behold, even from the lowliest God taketh His workers,” and he felt a flash of resentment, but it was only momentary. He was benumbed. Something seemed to be saying in his mind, “Will the old fool never have done?” But it did not appear to be himself. It was afar off and apart from him. The next he knew, a wet cheek was laid against his own. It was Aunt Hester. She was crying and holding his hand. Afterwards people were shaking hands with him and offering their congratulations; but he answered them in a helpless, mechanical way, as he had answered the questions.</p>
			<p>He sat through the sermon and heard it not. But some interest revived in him as the appointments were being read. He heard the president say, “It gives me pain to announce the resignation of one who has so long served in the Master’s vineyard, but our dear brother Simpson has decided that he is too old for active work, and has asked to be retired. While we do this with pain and sorrow for the loss⁠—though we do not wholly lose him⁠—of so able a man, we feel that we cannot do better than appoint as his successor in this charge the young man whom you have all seen so brilliantly enter into the ranks of consecrated workers, the <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Rev.</abbr> Frederick Brent.”</p>
			<p>A murmur of approval went round the assembly, and a few open “amens” broke forth as the unctuous old ecclesiastic sat down. It sounded to the ears of the young preacher like the breaking of waves on a far-off shore; and then the meaning of all that had happened sifted through his benumbed intellect, and he strove to rise. He would refuse to act. He would protest. He would tell them that he did not want to preach. But something held him down. He could not rise. The light went blue and green and purple before him. The church, with its sea of faces, spun round and round; his head fell forward.</p>
			<p>“He has fainted,” said someone.</p>
			<p>“The excitement has been too much for him.”</p>
			<p>“Poor young man, he has been studying too hard, working for this.”</p>
			<p>They carried him out and took him home, and one of the elders offered a special prayer for his speedy recovery, and that, being recovered, he might bear his new responsibilities with becoming meekness.</p>
			<p>When the young minister came to himself, he was lying on the bed in his own room, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hodges, Eliphalet, and a doctor were bending over him.</p>
			<p>“He’s coming round all right now,” said the medical man. “You won’t need me any longer.” And he departed.</p>
			<p>“How are you now, Fred?” asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hodges.</p>
			<p>The young man closed his eyes again and did not answer. He had awakened to a full realisation of his position, and a dull misery lay at his heart. He wished that he could die then and there, for death seemed the only escape from his bondage. He was bound, irrevocably bound.</p>
			<p>“Poor child,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hodges went on, “it was awful tryin’ on his nerves. Joy is worse ’n sorrow, sometimes; an’ then he’d been workin’ so hard. I’d never ’a’ believed he could do it, ef Brother Simpson hadn’t stuck up fur it.”</p>
			<p>“She knew it, then,” thought Fred. “It was all planned.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t think you’d better talk, Hester,” said her husband, in a low voice. He had seen a spasm pass over the face of the prostrate youth.</p>
			<p>“Well, I’ll go out an’ see about the dinner. Some o’ the folks I’ve invited will be comin’ in purty soon, an’ others’ll be droppin’ in to inquire how he is. I do hope he’ll be well enough to come to the table: it won’t seem hardly like an ordination dinner without the principal person. Jes’ set by him, ’Liphalet, an’ give him them drops the doctor left.”</p>
			<p>As soon as he heard the door close behind her, Brent opened his eyes and suddenly laid his hand on the old man’s shoulder. “You won’t let anybody see me, Uncle ’Liph? you won’t let them come in here?”</p>
			<p>“No, no, my boy, not ef you don’t want ’em,” said the old man.</p>
			<p>“I shall have to think it all over before I see anyone. I am not quite clear yet.”</p>
			<p>“I ’low it was unexpected.”</p>
			<p>“Did you know, Uncle ’Liph?” he asked, fixing his eyes upon his old friend’s face.</p>
			<p>“I know’d they was a-plannin’ somethin’, but I never could find out what, or I would have told you.”</p>
			<p>A look of relief passed over Brent’s face. Just then <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hodges opened the door. “Here’s Elizabeth to see him,” she said.</p>
			<p>“ ’Sh,” said the old man with great ostentation; and tiptoeing over to the door he partly drew it to, putting his head outside to whisper, “He is too weak; it ain’t best fur him to see nobody now.”</p>
			<p>He closed the door and returned to his seat. “It was ’Lizabeth,” he said. “Was I right?”</p>
			<p>For answer the patient arose from the bed and walked weakly over to his side.</p>
			<p>“Tut, tut, tut, Freddie,” said Eliphalet, hesitating over the name. “You’d better lay down now; you ain’t any too strong yet.”</p>
			<p>The young man leaned heavily on his chair, and looked into his friend’s eyes: “If God had given me such a man as you as a father, or even as a guardian, I would not have been damned,” he said.</p>
			<p>“ ’Sh, ’sh, my boy. Don’t say that. You’re goin’ to be all right; you’re⁠—you’re⁠—” Eliphalet’s eyes were moist, and his voice choked here. Rising, he suddenly threw his arms around Fred’s neck, crying, “You are my son. God has give you to me to nurse in the time of your trial.”</p>
			<p>The young man returned the embrace; and so <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hodges found them when she opened the door softly and peered in. She closed it noiselessly and withdrew.</p>
			<p>“Well, I never!” she said. There was a questioning wonder in her face.</p>
			<p>“I don’t know what to make of them two,” she added; “they couldn’t have been lovin’er ef they had been father and son.”</p>
			<p>After a while the guests began to arrive for the dinner. Many were the inquiries and calls for the new minister, but to them all Eliphalet made the same answer: “He ain’t well enough to see folks.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hodges herself did her best to bring him out, or to get him to let some of the guests in, but he would not. Finally her patience gave way, and she exclaimed, “Well, now, Frederick Brent, you must know that you air the pastor of a church, an’ you’ve got to make some sacrifices for people’s sake. Ef you kin possibly git up⁠—an’ I know you kin⁠—you ought to come out an’ show yoreself for a little while, anyhow. You’ve got some responsibilities now.”</p>
			<p>“I didn’t ask for them,” he answered, coldly. There was a set look about his lips. “Neither will I come out or see anyone. If I am old enough to be the pastor of a church, I am old enough to know my will and have it.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hodges was startled at the speech. She felt vaguely that there was a new element in the boy’s character since morning. He was on the instant a man. It was as if clay had suddenly hardened in the potter’s hands. She could no longer mould or ply him. In that moment she recognised the fact.</p>
			<p>The dinner was all that could be expected, and her visitors enjoyed it, in spite of the absence of the guest of honour, but for the hostess it was a dismal failure. After wielding the sceptre for years, it had been suddenly snatched from her hand; and she felt lost and helpless, deprived of her power.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
