<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Chapter</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</span>
			</h2>
			<p>So great has been our absorption in the careers of Fred Brent, Miss Prime, and Eliphalet Hodges that we have sadly neglected some of the characters whose acquaintance we made at the beginning of our story. But nature and Time have been kinder⁠—or more cruel, if you will. They have neither passed over nor neglected them. They have combined with trouble and hard work to kill one of Fred’s earliest friends. Melissa Davis is no more, and the oldest girl, Sophy, supplements her day’s work of saleswoman in a dry-goods store by getting supper in the evening and making the younger Davises step around. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warren, the sometime friend of Margaret Brent and enemy of Miss Prime, has moved farther out, into the suburbs, for Dexter has suburbs now, and boasts electric cars and amusement parks. Time has done much for the town. Its streets are paved, and the mean street that bore the tumble-down Brent cottage and its fellows has been built up and grown respectable. It and the street where Miss Prime’s cottage frowned down have settled away into a quiet residential portion of the town, while around to the east, south, and west, and on both sides of the little river that divides the city, roars and surges the traffic of a characteristic middle-West town. Halfway up the hill, where the few aristocrats of the place formerly lived in almost royal luxuriance and seclusion, a busy sewing-machine factory has forced its way, and with its numerous chimneys and stacks literally smoked the occupants out; at their very gates it sits like the commander of a besieging army, and about it cluster the cottages of the workmen, in military regularity. Little and neat and trim, they flock there like the commander’s obedient host, and such they are, for the sight of them offends the eyes of wealth. So, what with the smoke, and what with the proximity of the poorer classes, wealth capitulates, evacuates, and, with robes discreetly held aside, passes by to another quarter, and a new district is born where poverty dare not penetrate. Seated on a hill, where, as is their inclination, they may look down, literally and figuratively, upon the hurrying town, they are complacent again, and the newcomers to the town, the new-rich magnates and the half-rich strugglers who would be counted on the higher level, move up and swell their numbers at Dexter View.</p>
			<p>Amid all this change, two alone of those we know remain unaltered and unalterable, true to their traditions. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smith and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Martin, the two ancient gossips, still live side by side, spying and commenting on all that falls within their ken, much as they did on that day when ’Liphalet Hodges took Fred Brent for his first drive behind old Bess. Their windows still open out in the same old way, whence they can watch the happenings of the street. If there has been any change in them at all, it is that they have grown more absorbed and more keen in following and dissecting their neighbours’ affairs.</p>
			<p>It is to these two worthies, then, that we wish to reintroduce the reader on an early autumn evening some three months after the events narrated in the last chapter.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Martin went to her back fence, which was the nearest point of communication between her and her neighbour. “Mis’ Smith,” she called, and her confederate came hurrying to the door, thimble on and a bit of sewing clutched precariously in her apron, just as she had caught it up when the significant call brought her to the back door.</p>
			<p>“Oh, you’re busy as usual, I see,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Martin.</p>
			<p>“It ain’t nothin’ partic’ler, only a bit o’ bastin’ that I was doin’.”</p>
			<p>“You ain’t a-workin’ on the machine, then, so you might bring your sewin’ over and take a cup o’ tea with me.”</p>
			<p>“La! now that’s so kind o’ you, Mis’ Martin. I was jest thinkin’ how good a cup o’ tea would taste, but I didn’t want to stop to make it. I’ll be over in a minute, jest as soon as I see if my front door is locked.” And she disappeared within the house, while <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Martin returned to her own sitting-room.</p>
			<p>The invited knew very well what the invitation to tea meant. She knew that some fresh piece of news was to be related and discussed. The beverage of which she was invited to partake was but a pretext, but neither the one nor the other admitted as much. Each understood perfectly, as by a tacit agreement, and each tried to deceive herself and the other as to motives and objects.</p>
			<p>There is some subtle tie between tea-drinking and gossip. It is over their dainty cups that women dissect us men and damn their sisters. Some of the quality of the lemon they take in their tea gets into their tongues. Tea is to talk what dew is to a plant, a gentle nourishing influence, which gives to its product much of its own quality. There are two acids in the tea which cultured women take. There is only one in the beverage brewed by commonplace people. But that is enough.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Martin had taken her tray into the sitting-room, where a slight fire was burning in the prim “parlour cook,” on which the hot water was striving to keep its quality when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smith came in.</p>
			<p>“La, Mis’ Martin, you do manage to have everything so cosy. I’m shore a little fire in a settin’-room don’t feel bad these days.”</p>
			<p>“I jest thought I’d have to have a fire,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Martin, “fur I was feelin’ right down chilly, though goodness knows a person does burn enough coal in winter, without throwin’ it away in these early fall days.”</p>
			<p>“Well, the Lord’s put it here fur our comfort, an’ I think we’re a-doin’ His will when we make use o’ the good things He gives us.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, but Mis’ Smith, there’s too many people that goes about the world thinkin’ that they know jest what the Lord’s will is; but I have my doubts about ’em, though, mind you, I ain’t a-mentionin’ no names: ‘no name, no blame.’ ” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Martin pressed her lips and shook her head, a combination of gestures that was eloquent with meaning. It was too much for her companion. Her curiosity got the better of her caution.</p>
			<p>“Dear me!” she exclaimed. “What is it <em>now</em>?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, nothin’ of any consequence at all. It ain’t fur me to be a-judgin’ my neighbours or a-talkin’ about ’em. I jest thought I’d have you over to tea, you’re sich good company.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smith was so impatient that she had forgotten her sewing and it lay neglected in her lap, but in no other way did she again betray her anxiety. She knew that there was something new to be told and that it would be told all in good time. But when gossip has become a fine art it must be conducted with dignity and precision.</p>
			<p>“Let me see, I believe you take two lumps o’ sugar an’ no milk.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Martin knew perfectly what her friend took. “I don’t know how this tea is. I got it from the new grocery over at the corner.” She tasted it deliberately. “It might ’a’ drawed a little more.” Slowly she stirred it round and round, and then, as if she had drawn the truth from the depths of her cup, she observed, “This is a queer world, Mis’ Smith.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smith sighed a sigh that was appreciative and questioning at once. “It is indeed,” she echoed; “I’m always a-sayin’ to myself what a mighty cur’us world this is.”</p>
			<p>“Have you ever got any tea from that new grocery-man?” asked her companion, with tantalising irrelevance.</p>
			<p>“No: I hain’t never even been in there.”</p>
			<p>“Well, this here’s middlin’ good; don’t you think so?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, it’s more than middlin’, it’s downright good. I think I must go into that grocery some time, myself.”</p>
			<p>“I was in there today, and met Mis’ Murphy: she says there’s great goin’-ons up at Miss Prime’s⁠—I never shall be able to call her Mis’ Hodges.”</p>
			<p>“You don’t tell me! She and Brother ’Liphalet ain’t had a fallin’ out already, have they? Though what more could you expect?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, no, indeed. It ain’t no fallin’ out, nothin’ o’ the kind.”</p>
			<p>“Well, what then? What has Miss Hester⁠—I mean Mis’ Hodges been doin’ now? Where will that woman stop? What’s she done?”</p>
			<p>“Well, you see⁠—do have another cup of tea, an’ help yoreself to that bread an’ butter⁠—you see, Freddie Brent has finished at the high school, an’ they’ve been wonderin’ what to make him.”</p>
			<p>“Well, what air they a-goin’ to make him? His father was a good stonemason, when he was anything.”</p>
			<p>“Humph! you don’t suppose Miss Hester’s been sendin’ a boy to school to learn Latin and Greek an’ algebry an’ sich, to be a stonemason, do you? Huh uh! Said I to myself, as soon as I see her sendin’ him from the common school to high school, says I, ‘She’s got big notions in her head.’ Oh, no; the father’s trade was not good enough fur her boy: so thinks Mis’ ’Liphalet Hodges.”</p>
			<p>“Well, what on airth is she goin’ to make out of him, then?”</p>
			<p>“Please pass me that sugar: thank you. You know <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Daniels offered him a place as clerk in the same store where Sophy Davis is. It was mighty kind o’ <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Daniels, I think, to offer him the job.”</p>
			<p>“Well, didn’t he take it?”</p>
			<p>“Well, partly he did an’ partly he didn’t, ef you can understand that.”</p>
			<p>“Sally Martin, what do you mean? A body has to fairly pick a thing out o’ you.”</p>
			<p>“I mean that she told <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Daniels he might work fur him half of every day.”</p>
			<p>“Half a day! An’ what’s he goin’ to do the other half?”</p>
			<p>“He’s a-goin’ to the Bible Seminary the other half-day. She’s a-goin’ to make a preacher out o’ him.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Martin had slowly and tortuously worked up to her climax, and she shot forth the last sentence with a jubilant ring. She had well calculated its effects. Sitting back in her chair, she supped her tea complacently as she contemplated her companion’s astonishment. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smith had completely collapsed into her seat, folded her arms, and closed her eyes. “Laws a massy!” she exclaimed. “What next? Old Tom, drunken Tom, swearin’ an’ ravin’ Tom Brent’s boy a preacher!” Then suddenly she opened her eyes and sat up very erect and alert as she broke forth, “Sally Martin, what air you a-tellin’ me? It ain’t possible. It’s ag’in’ nature. A panther’s cub ain’t a-goin’ to be a lamb. It’s downright wicked, that’s what I say.”</p>
			<p>“An’ so says I to Mis’ Murphy, them same identical words; says I, ‘Mis’ Murphy, it’s downright wicked. It’s a-shamin’ of the Lord’s holy callin’ o’ the ministry.’ ”</p>
			<p>“An’ does the young scamp pertend to ’a’ had a call?”</p>
			<p>“No, indeed: he was mighty opposed to it, and so was her husband; but that woman was so set she wouldn’t agree to nothin’ else. He don’t pertend to ’a’ heerd no call, ’ceptin’ Miss Hester’s, an’ that was a command. I know it’s all true, fur Mis’ Murphy, while she wasn’t jest a-listenin’, lives next door and heerd it all.”</p>
			<p>And so the two women fell to discussing the question, as they had heard it, pro and con. It was all true, as these gossips had it, that Miss Hester had put into execution her half-expressed determination to make a preacher of Fred. He had heard nothing of it until the day when he rushed in elated over the kindly offer of a place in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Daniels’s store. Then his guardian had firmly told him of her plan, and there was a scene.</p>
			<p>“You kin jest tell <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Daniels that you kin work for him half a day every day, an’ that you’re a-goin’ to put in the rest of your time at the Bible Seminary. I’ve made all the arrangements.”</p>
			<p>“But I don’t want to be a preacher,” the boy had retorted, with some heat. “I’d a good deal rather learn business, and some day start out for myself.”</p>
			<p>“It ain’t what some of us wants to do in this life; it’s what the Lord appoints us to; an’ it’s wicked fur you to rebel.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know how you can know so much what the Lord means for me to do. I should think He would give His messages to those who are to do the work.”</p>
			<p>“That’s right, Freddie Brent, sass me, sass me. That’s what I’ve struggled all the best days of my life to raise you fur.”</p>
			<p>“I’m not sassing you, but⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Don’t you think, Hester,” broke in her husband, “that mebbe there’s some truth in what Freddie says? Don’t you think the Lord kind o’ whispers what He wants people to do in their own ears? Mebbe it wasn’t never intended fur Freddie to be a preacher: there’s other ways o’ doin’ good besides a-talkin’ from the pulpit.”</p>
			<p>“I’d be bound fur you, ’Liphalet: it’s a shame, you a-goin’ ag’in’ me, after all I’ve done to make Freddie material fit for the Lord’s use. Jest think what you’ll have to answer fur, a-helpin’ this unruly boy to shirk his dooty.”</p>
			<p>“I ain’t a-goin’ ag’in’ you, Hester. You’re my wife, an’ I ’low ’at your jedgment’s purty sound on most things. I ain’t a-goin’ ag’in’ you at all, but⁠—but⁠—I was jest a-wonderin’.”</p>
			<p>The old man brought out the last words slowly, meditatively. He was “jest a-wonderin’.” His wife, though, never wondered.</p>
			<p>“Mind you,” she went on, “I say to you, Freddie, and to yore uncle ’Liphalet too, ef he upholds you, that it ain’t me you’re a-rebellin’ against. It’s yore dooty an’ the will o’ God that you’re a-fightin’. It’s easy enough to rebel against man; but do you know what you’re a-doin’ when you set yourself up against the Almighty? Do you want to do that?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” came the boy’s answer like a flash. He was stung and irritated into revolt, and a torrent of words poured from his lips unrestrained. “I’m tired of doing right. I’m tired of being good. I’m tired of obeying God⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Freddie!” But over the dam the water was flowing with irresistible force. The horror of his guardian’s face and the terrible reproach in her voice could not check the boy.</p>
			<p>“Everything,” he continued, “that I have ever wanted to do since I can remember has been bad, or against my duty, or displeasing to God. Why does He frown on everything I want to do? Why do we always have to be killing our wishes on account of duty? I don’t believe it. I hate duty. I hate obedience. I hate everything, and I won’t obey⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Freddie, be keerful: don’t say anything that’ll hurt after yore mad spell’s over. Don’t blaspheme the Lord A’mighty.”</p>
			<p>’Liphalet Hodges’ voice was cool and tender and persuasive. He laid his hand on the boy’s shoulder, while his wife sat there motionless, white and rigid with horror.</p>
			<p>The old man’s words and his gentle touch had a wonderful effect on the boy; they checked his impassioned outburst; but his pent-up heart was too full. He burst into tears and rushed headlong from the house.</p>
			<p>For a time he walked aimlessly on, his mind in a tumult of rage. Then he began to come to himself. He saw the people as they passed him. He had eyes again for the street, and he wondered where he was going. He felt an overwhelming desire to talk to someone and to get sympathy, consolation, and perhaps support. But whither should he turn? If ’Liphalet Hodges had been at the old house, his steps would naturally have bent in that direction; but this refuge was no longer his. Then his mind began going over the people whom he knew, and no name so stuck in his fancy as that of Elizabeth. It was a hard struggle. He was bashful. Any other time he would not have done it, but now his great need created in him an intense desperation that made him bold. He turned and retraced his steps toward the Simpson house.</p>
			<p>Elizabeth was leaning over the gate. The autumn evening was cool: she had a thin shawl about her shoulders. She was humming a song as Fred came up. His own agitation made her seem irritatingly calm. She opened the gate and made room for him at her side.</p>
			<p>“You seem dreadfully warm,” she said, “and here I was getting ready to go in because it is so cool.”</p>
			<p>“I’ve been walking very fast,” he answered, hesitatingly.</p>
			<p>“Don’t you think you’d better go in, so as not to take cold?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I don’t care if I do take cold.” The speech sounded rude. Elizabeth looked at him in surprise.</p>
			<p>“What’s the matter with you?” she asked.</p>
			<p>“I’m mad; that’s what’s the matter.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Fred, you shouldn’t get mad: you know it’s wrong.”</p>
			<p>He put up his hand as if she had struck him. “Wrong! wrong! It seems I can’t hear anything else but that word. Everything is wrong. Don’t say any more about it. I don’t want to hear the word again.”</p>
			<p>Elizabeth did not know what to make of his words, so she said nothing, and for a while they stood in strained silence. After a while he said, “Aunt Hester wants me to be a preacher.”</p>
			<p>“I am so glad to hear that,” she returned. “I think you’ll make a good one.”</p>
			<p>“You too!” he exclaimed, resentfully. “Why should I make a good one? Why need I be one at all?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, because you’re smart, and then you’ve always been good.”</p>
			<p>The young man was suddenly filled with disdain. His anger returned. He felt how utterly out of accord he was with everyone else. “Don’t you think there is anything else required besides being ‘smart’ and ‘good’?” He himself would have blushed at the tone in which he said this, could he have recognised it. “I’m smart because I happened to pass all my examinations. I got through the high school at eighteen: nearly everyone does the same. I’m good because I have never had a chance to be bad: I have never been out of Aunt Hester’s sight long enough. Anybody could be good that way.”</p>
			<p>“But then older people know what is best for us, Fred.”</p>
			<p>“Why should they? They don’t know what’s beating inside of us away down here.” The boy struck his breast fiercely. “I don’t believe they do know half the time what is best, and I don’t believe that God intends them to know.”</p>
			<p>“I wouldn’t talk about it, if I were you. I must go in. Won’t you come in with me?”</p>
			<p>“Not tonight,” he replied. “I must be off.”</p>
			<p>“But papa might give you some advice.”</p>
			<p>“I’ve had too much of it now. What I want is room to breathe in once.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t understand you.”</p>
			<p>“I know you don’t; nobody does, or tries to. Go in, Lizzie,” he said more calmly. “I don’t want you to catch cold, even if I do. Good night.” And he turned away.</p>
			<p>The girl stood for a moment looking after him; her eye was moist. Then she pouted, “Fred’s real cross tonight,” and went in.</p>
			<p>It is one of the glaring sarcasms of life to see with what complacency a shallow woman skims the surface of tragedy and thinks that she has sounded the depths.</p>
			<p>Fred continued his walk towards home. He was thinking. It ran in him that Elizabeth was a good deal of a fool; and then he felt horrified with himself for thinking it. It did not occur to him that the hard conditions through which he had come had made him mentally and spiritually older than the girl. He was thinking of his position, how perfectly alone he stood. Most of the people whom he knew would see only blind obstinacy in his refusal to be a minister. But were one’s inclinations nothing? Was there really nothing in the “call” to preach? So he pondered as he walked, and more and more the hopelessness of his predicament became revealed to him. All his life had been moulded by this one woman’s hands. Would not revolt now say to the world, “I am grown now; I do not need this woman who has toiled. I can disobey her with impunity; I will do so.”</p>
			<p>He went home, and before going in leaned his head long upon the gate and thought. A listless calm had succeeded his storm of passion. He went in and to bed.</p>
			<p>At breakfast he seemed almost cheerful, while <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Hodges was subdued. His wife had taken refuge in an attitude of injured silence.</p>
			<p>“Aunt Hester,” said the young man, apparently without effort, “I was wrong yesterday; I am sorry. I will do whatever you say, even to being a preacher.” Something came up in his throat and choked him as he saw a brightness come into the face and eyes of his beloved “Uncle ’Liph,” but it grew hard and bitter there as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hodges replied, “Well, I’m glad the Lord has showed you the errors of your way an’ brought you around to a sense o’ your dooty to Him an’ to me.”</p>
			<p>Poor, blind, conceited humanity! Interpreters of God, indeed! We reduce the Deity to vulgar fractions. We place our own little ambitions and inclinations before a shrine, and label them “divine messages.” We set up our Delphian tripod, and we are the priest and oracles. We despise the plans of Nature’s Ruler and substitute our own. With our short sight we affect to take a comprehensive view of eternity. Our horizon is the universe. We spy on the Divine and try to surprise His secrets, or to sneak into His confidence by stealth. We make God the eternal a puppet. We measure infinity with a foot-rule.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
