<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Chapter</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>
			</h2>
			<p>If Fred Brent had needed anything to increase his consciousness of the new feeling that had come to him, he could not have done better to get it than by going to see Eliphalet Hodges next day. His war of thought had gone on all night, and when he rose in the morning he thought that he looked guilty, and he was afraid that Miss Prime would notice it and read his secret. He wanted rest. He wanted to be secure from anyone who would even suspect what was in his heart. But he wanted to see and to talk to someone. Who better, then, than his old friend?</p>
			<p>So he finished his morning’s chores and slipped away. He would not pass by Elizabeth’s house, but went by alleys and lanes until he reached his destination. The house looked rather silent and deserted, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hodges’ old assistant did not seem to be working in the garden as usual. But after some search the boy found his old friend smoking upon the back porch. There was a cloud upon the usually bright features, and the old man took his pipe from his mouth with a disconsolate sigh as the boy came in sight.</p>
			<p>“I ’m mighty glad you ’ve come, Freddie,” said he, in a sad voice. “I ’ve been a-wantin’ to talk to you all the mornin’. Set down on the side o’ the porch, or git a chair out o’ the house, ef you ’d ruther.”</p>
			<p>The boy sat down, wondering what could be the matter with his friend, and what he could have to say to him. Surely it must be something serious, for the whole tone and manner of his companion indicated something of import. The next remark startled him into sudden suspicion.</p>
			<p>“There ’s lots o’ things made me think o’ lots of other things in the last couple o’ days. You ’ve grown up kind o’ quick like, Freddie, so that a body ’ain’t hardly noticed it, but that ain’t no matter. You ’re up or purty nigh it, an’ you can understand and appreciate lots o’ the things that you used to couldn’t.”</p>
			<p>Fred sat still, with mystery and embarrassment written on his face. He wanted to hear more, but he was almost afraid to listen further.</p>
			<p>“I ’ain’t watched you so close, mebbe, as I ’d ought to ’a’ done, but when I seen you yistiddy evenin’ holdin’ that little girl in yore arms I said to myself, I said, ‘Liphalet Hodges, Freddie ain’t a child no more; he ’s growed up.’” The boy’s face was scarlet. Now he was sure that the thoughts of his heart had been surprised, and that this best of friends thought of him as “fresh,” “mannish,” or even wicked. He could not bear the thought of it; again the tears rose in his eyes, usually so free from such evidences of weakness. But the old man went on slowly in a low, half-reminiscent tone, without looking at his auditor to see what effect his words had had. “Well, that was one of the things that set me thinkin’; an’ then there was another.” He cleared his throat and pulled hard at his pipe; something made him blink⁠—dust, or smoke, or tears, perhaps. “Freddie,” he half sobbed out, “old Bess is dead. Pore old Bess died last night o’ colic. I ’m afeared the drive to the picnic was too much fur her.”</p>
			<p>“Old Bess dead!” cried the boy, grieved and at the same time relieved. “Who would have thought it? Poor old girl! It seems like losing one of the family.”</p>
			<p>“She was one of the family,” said the old man brokenly. “She was more faithful than most human beings.” The two stood sadly musing, the boy as sad as the man. “Old Bess” was the horse that had taken him for his first ride, that winter morning years before, when the heart of the child was as cold as the day. Eliphalet Hodges had warmed the little heart, and, in the years that followed, man, child, and horse had grown nearer to each other in a queer but sympathetic companionship.</p>
			<p>Then, as if recalling his mind from painful reflections, the elder man spoke again. “But it ain’t no use a-worryin’ over what can’t be helped. We was both fond o’ old Bess, an’ I know you feel as bad about losin’ her as I do. But I ’m a-goin’ to give her a decent burial, sich as a Christian ought to have; fur, while the old mare wasn’t no perfessor, she lived the life, an’ that ’s more ’n most perfessors do. Yes, sir, I ’m a-goin’ to have her buried: no glue-man fur me. I reckon you ’re a-wantin’ to know how old Bess dyin’ an’ yore a-savin’ ’Lizabeth could run into each other in my mind; but they did. Fur, as I see you standin’ there a-holdin’ the little girl, it come to me sudden like, ’Freddie ’s grown now, an’ he’ll be havin’ a girl of his own purty soon, ef he ’ain’t got one now. Mebbe it’ll be ’Lizabeth.’ ” The old man paused for a moment; his eyes rested on the boy’s fiery face. “Tut, tut,” he resumed, “you ain’t ashamed, air you? Well, what air you a-gittin’ so red fur? Havin’ a girl ain’t nothin’ to be ashamed of, or skeered about neither. Most people have girls one time or another, an’ I don’t know of nothin’ that’ll make a boy or a young man go straighter than to know that his girl’s eyes air upon him. Don’t be ashamed at all.”</p>
			<p>Fred still blushed, but he felt better, and his face lightened over the kindly words.</p>
			<p>“I didn’t finish tellin’ you, though, what I started on. I got to thinkin’ yesterday about my young days, when I had a girl, an’ how I used to ride back an’ forth on the pore old horse right into this town to see her; an’ as I drove home from the picnic I talked to the old nag about it, an’ she whisked her tail an’ laid back her ears, jest like she remembered it all. It was on old Bess that I rode away from my girl’s house after her first ’no’ to me, an’ it seemed then that the animal sympathised with me, fur she drooped along an’ held down her head jest like I was a-doin’. Many a time after that we rode off that way together, fur the girl was set in her ways, an’ though she confessed to a hankerin’ fur me, she wanted to be independent. I think her father put the idee into her head, fur he was a hard man, an’ she was his all, his wife bein’ dead. After a while we stopped talkin’ about the matter, an’ I jest went an’ come as a friend. I only popped the question once more, an’ that was when her father died an’ she was left all alone.</p>
			<p>“It was a summer day, warm an’ cheerful like this, only it was evenin’, an’ we was a-settin’ out on her front garden walk. She was a-knittin’, an’ I was a-whippin’ the groun’ with a switch that I had brought along to touch Bess up with now an’ then. I had hitched her out front, an’ she kep’ a-turnin’ her eyes over the fence as ef she was as anxious as I was, an’ that was mighty anxious. Fin’ly I got the question out, an’ the girl went all red in a minute: she had been jest a purty pink before. Her knittin’ fell in her lap. Fust she started to answer, then she stopped an’ her eyes filled up. I seen she was a-weak’nin’, so I thought I ’d push the matter. ’Come,’ says I, gentle like, an’ edgin’ near up to her, ’give me my answer. I been waitin’ a long time fur a yes.’ With that she grabbed knittin’, apron, an’ all, an’ put ’em to her eyes an’ rushed into the house. I knowed she ’d gone in to have a good cry an’ settle her nerves, fur that ’s the way all women-folks does: so I knowed it was no use to bother her until it was done. So I walks out to the fence, an’, throwin’ an arm over old Bess’s back, I told her all about it, jest as I ’m a-tellin’ you, she a-lookin’ at me with her big meltin’ eyes an’ whinnyin’ soft like.</p>
			<p>“After a little while the girl come out. She was herself ag’in, but there was a look in her face that turned my heart stone-cold. Her voice sounded kind o’ sharp as she said, ‘Liphalet, I ’ve been a-thinkin’ over what you said. I ’m only a woman, an’ I come purty near bein’ a weak one; but I ’m all right now. I don’t mind tellin’ you that ef I was ever goin’ to marry, you ’d be my choice, but I ain’t a-goin’ to have my father’s sperrit a-thinkin’ that I took advantage of his death to marry you. Goodbye, ’Liphalet.’ She held out her hand to me, an’ I took it. ’Come an’ see me sometimes,’ she said. I couldn’t answer, so I went out and got on old Bess an’ we jogged away. It was an awful disappointment, but I thought I would wait an’ let my girl come aroun’, fur sometimes they do⁠—in fact mostly; but she has never give me a sign to make me think that she has. That was twenty years ago, an’ I ’ve been waitin’ faithful ever sence. But it seems like she was different from most women, an’ ’specially good on holdin’ out. People that was babies then have growed up an’ married. An’ now the old companion that has been with me through all this waitin’ has left me. I know what it means. It means that I ’m old, that years have been wasted, that chances have been lost. But you have taught me my lesson, Bess. Dear old Bess, even in yore last hours you did me a service, an’ you, Freddie, you have given me the stren’th that I had twenty years ago, an’ I ’m a-goin’ to try to save what remains of my life. I never felt how alone I was until now.” He was greatly agitated. He rose and grasped the boy’s arm. “Come, Freddie,” he said; “come on. I ’m a-goin’ ag’in to ask Miss Prime to be my wife.”</p>
			<p>“Miss Prime!” exclaimed Fred, aghast.</p>
			<p>“Miss Prime was my sweetheart, Freddie, thirty years ago, jest like ’Lizabeth is yor’n now. Come along.”</p>
			<p>The two set out, Hodges stepping with impatient alacrity, and the boy too astounded to speak.</p>
			<p>It was a beautiful morning at the end of June. The sense of spring’s reviving influence had not yet given way to the full languor and sensuousness of summer. The wind was soft and warm and fragrant. The air was full of the song of birds and the low droning of early bees. The river that flowed between the green hills and down through Dexter was like a pane of wrinkled glass, letting light and joy even into the regions below. Over the streets and meadows and hills lay a half haze, like a veil over the too dazzling beauty of an Eastern princess. The hum of business⁠—for in the passing years Dexter had grown busy⁠—the roar of traffic in the streets, all melted into a confused and intoxicating murmur as the pedestrians passed into the residence portion of the town to the cottage where Miss Prime still lived. The garden was as prim as ever, the walks as straight and well kept. The inevitable white curtains were fluttering freshly from the window, over which a huge matrimony vine drooped lazily and rung its pink and white bells to invite the passing bees.</p>
			<p>Eliphalet paused at the gate and heaved a deep sigh. So much depended upon the issue of his present visit. The stream of his life had been flowing so smoothly before. Now if its tranquillity were disturbed it never could be stilled again. Did he dare to risk so much upon so hazardous a chance? Were it not better to go back home, back to his old habits and his old ease, without knowing his fate? That would at least leave him the pleasure of speculating. He might delude himself with the hope that some day⁠—He faltered. His hand was on the gate, but his face was turned back towards the way he had come. Should he enter, or should he go back? Fate decided for him, for at this juncture the door opened, and Miss Hester appeared in the doorway and called out, “Do come in, ’Liphalet. What air you a-standin’ out there so long a-studyin’ about, fur all the world like a bashful boy?”</p>
			<p>The shot told. He was a bashful boy again, going fearfully, tremblingly, lovingly, to see the girl of his heart; but there was no old Bess to whinny encouragement to him from over the little fence. If he blushed, even the scrutinising eyes of Miss Prime did not see it, for the bronze laid on his face by summers and winters of exposure; but he felt the hot blood rush up to his face and neck, and the perspiration breaking out on his brow. He paused long enough to mop his face, and then, saying to Fred, in a low tone, “You stay in the garden, my boy, until it ’s all over,” he opened the gate and entered in the manner of one who leads a forlorn hope through forest aisles where an ambush is suspected. The door closed behind him. Interested, excited, wondering and fearing, doubting and hoping, Fred remained in the garden. There were but two thoughts in his head, and they were so new and large that his poor boy’s cranium had room for no more. They ran in this wise: “Miss Prime is Uncle ’Liphalet’s girl, and Elizabeth is mine.”</p>
			<p>Within, Miss Prime was talking on in her usual decided fashion, while the man sat upon the edge of his chair and wondered how he could break in upon the stream of her talk and say what was in his heart. At last the lady exclaimed, “I do declare, ’Liphalet, what kin be the matter with you? You ’ain’t said ten words sence you ’ve been a-settin’ there. I hope you ’ain’t talked yoreself entirely out with Fred. It does beat all how you an’ that boy seem to grow thicker an’ thicker every day. One ’ud think fur all the world that you told him all yore secrets, an’ was afeared he ’d tell ’em, by the way you stick by him; an’ he ’s jest as bad about you. It ’s amazin’.”</p>
			<p>“Freddie ’s a wonderful good boy, an’ he ’s smart, too. They ain’t none of ’em a-goin’ to throw dust in his eyes in the race of life.”</p>
			<p>“I ’m shore I ’ve tried to do my dooty by him the very best I could, an’ ef he does amount to anything in this world it’ll be through hard labour an’ mighty careful watchin’.” Miss Hester gave a sigh that was meant to be full of solemnity, but that positively reeked with self-satisfaction.</p>
			<p>“But as you say, ’Liphalet,” she went on, “Fred ain’t the worst boy in the world, nor the dumbest neither, ef I do say it myself. I ain’t a-sayin’, mind you, that he ’s anything so great or wonderful; but I ’ve got to thinkin’ that there ’s somethin’ in him besides original sin, an’ I should feel that the Lord had been mighty favourin’ to me ef I could manage to draw it out. The fact of it is, ’Liphalet, I ’ve took a notion in my head about Fred, an’ I ’m a-goin’ to tell you what it is. I ’ve decided to make a preacher out o’ him.”</p>
			<p>“H’m⁠—ah⁠—well, Miss Hester, don’t you think you ’d better let the Lord do that?”</p>
			<p>“Nonsense, ’Liphalet! you ’ain’t got no insight at all. I believe in people a-doin’ their part an’ not a-shovin’ everything off on the Lord. The shiftless don’t want nothin’ better than to say that they will leave the Lord to take care o’ things, an’ then fold their arms an’ set down an’ let things go to the devil. Remember, Brother Hodges, I don’t mean that in a perfane way. But then, because God made the sunlight an’ the rain, it ain’t no sign that we shouldn’t prune the vine.”</p>
			<p>Miss Hester’s face had flushed up with the animation of her talk, and her eyes were sparkling with excitement.</p>
			<p>Eliphalet looked at her, and his heart leaped. He felt that the time had come to speak.</p>
			<p>“Miss Hester,” he began, and the hat in his hand went round and round nervously.</p>
			<p>“ ’Liphalet, fur goodness’ sake do lay yore hat on the table. You’ll ruin the band of it, an’ you make me as nervous as a cat.”</p>
			<p>He felt a little dampened after this, but he laid down the offending hat and began again. “I ’ve been thinkin’ some myself, Miss Hester, an’ it ’s been about you.”</p>
			<p>“About me? La, ’Liphalet, what have you been a-thinkin’ now?” The “now” sounded as if his thoughts were usually rather irresponsible.</p>
			<p>“It was about you an’⁠—an’⁠—old Bess.”</p>
			<p>“About me an’ old Bess! Bless my soul, man, will you stop beatin’ about the bush an’ tell me what on airth I ’ve got to do with yore horse?”</p>
			<p>“Old Bess is dead, Miss Hester; died last night o’ colic.”</p>
			<p>“Well, I thought there was somethin’ the matter with you. I ’m mighty sorry to hear about the poor old creatur; but she ’d served you a long while.”</p>
			<p>“That ’s jest what set me a-thinkin’: she has served me a long while, an’ now she ’s dead. Do you know what that means, Miss Hester? It means that we ’re a-gittin’ old, you an’ me. Do you know when I got old Bess? It was nigh thirty years ago: I used to ride her up to this door an’ tie her to that tree out there: it was a saplin’ then. An’ now she ’s dead.”</p>
			<p>The man’s voice trembled, and his listener was strangely silent.</p>
			<p>“You know on what errands the old horse used to bring me,” he went on, “but it wasn’t to be⁠—then. Hester,” he rose, went over to her, and looked down into her half-averted face, which went red and pale by turns⁠—“Hester, ’ain’t we wasted time enough?”</p>
			<p>There was a long pause before she lifted her face: he stood watching her with the light of a great eagerness in his eyes. At last she spoke. There was a catch in her voice; it was softer than usual.</p>
			<p>“ ’Liphalet,” she began, “I ’m right glad you remember those days. I ’ain’t never furgot ’em myself. It ’s true you ’ve been a good, loyal friend to me, an’ I thank you fur it, but, after all these years⁠—”</p>
			<p>He broke in upon her with something like youthful impetuosity. “After all these years,” he exclaimed, “an endurin’ love ought to be rewarded. Hester, I ain’t a-goin’ to take ’no’ fur an answer. I ’ve got lots o’ years o’ life in me yet⁠—we both have⁠—an’ I ain’t a-goin’ on with an empty home an’ an empty heart no longer.”</p>
			<p>“ ’Liphalet, you ain’t a young man no more, an’ I ain’t a young woman, an’ the Lord⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I don’t care ef I ain’t; an’ I don’t believe in shovin’ everything off on the Lord.”</p>
			<p>“ ’Liphalet!” It was a reproach.</p>
			<p>“Hester!” This was love. He put his arm around her and kissed her. “You ’re a-goin’ to say yes, ain’t you? You ain’t a-goin’ to send me away miserable? You ’re a-dyin’ to say yes, but you ’re a-tryin’ to force yoreself not to. Don’t.” He lifted her face as a young lover might, and looked down into her eyes. “Is it yes?”</p>
			<p>“Well, ’Liphalet it ’pears like you ’re jest so pesterin’ that I ’ve got to say yes. Yes, then.” And she returned the quiet but jubilant kiss that he laid upon her lips.</p>
			<p>“After all these years,” he said. “Sorrow may last fur a night, but joy cometh in the mornin’. It was a long night, but, thank the Lord, mornin’ ’s broke.” Then, rising, he went to the door and called joyously, “Freddie, come on in: it ’s all over.”</p>
			<p>“ ’Liphalet, did that boy know what you was a-goin’ to say?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, o’ course he did.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, my! oh, my! Well, I ’ve got a good mind to take it all back. Oh, my!” And when Fred came in, for the first time in her life Miss Prime was abashed and confused in his presence.</p>
			<p>But Eliphalet had no thought of shame. He took her by the hand and said, “Freddie, Miss Hester’s consented at last: after thirty years, she ’s a-goin’ to marry me.”</p>
			<p>But Miss Hester broke in, “ ’Liphalet, don’t be a-puttin’ notions in that boy’s head. You go ’way, Fred, right away.”</p>
			<p>Fred went out, but he felt bolder. He went past Elizabeth’s house whistling. He didn’t care. He wondered if he would have to wait thirty years for her. He hoped not.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
