<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Chapter</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
			</h2>
			<p>“Goodness gracious, Mis’ Smith,” exclaimed <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Martin, rushing excitedly into the house of her next-door neighbour, “you’d ought to seen what I seen jest now.”</p>
			<p>“Do tell, Mis’ Martin! What on airth was it?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I’m shore you’d never guess in the wide, wide world.”</p>
			<p>“An’ I’m jest as shore that I ain’t a-goin’ to pester my head tryin’ to: so go on an’ tell me what it was.”</p>
			<p>“Lawsy me! what next’ll happen, an’ what does things mean, anyhow?”</p>
			<p>“I can’t tell you. Fur my part, I ’ain’t heerd what ‘things’ air yit.” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Smith was getting angry.</p>
			<p>“My! Mis’ Smith, don’t git so impatient. Give me time to git my breath: it’ll be enough, when I do tell you, to take away yore breath, jest like it did mine.”</p>
			<p>“Sallie Martin, you do beat all fur keepin’ a body on the hooks.”</p>
			<p>“T ain’t my fault, Mis’ Smith. I declare I’m too astonished to speak. You know I was a-standin’ in my window, not a-thinkin’ nor expectin’ nothin’, jest like any person would, you know⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Yes, yes; go on.”</p>
			<p>“I was jest a-lookin’ down the street, careless, when who should I see drive up to Miss Prime’s door, an’ hitch his hoss an’ go in, but Brother ’Liphalet Hodges!”</p>
			<p>“Well, sakes alive, Sallie Martin, I hope you ain’t a-considerin’ that strange. Why, you could ’a’ seen that very same sight any time these fifteen years.”</p>
			<p>“But wait a minute till I tell you. I ain’t done yit, by no means. The strange part ’ain’t come. I thought I’d jest wait at the window and see how long Brother Hodges would stay: not that it was any o’ my bus’ness, of course, or that I wanted to be a spyin’ on anybody, but sorter fur⁠—fur cur’osity, you know.”</p>
			<p>“Cert’n’y,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Smith, feelingly. She could sympathise with such a sentiment.</p>
			<p>“Well, after a while he come out a-smilin’ as pleasant as a basket o’ chips; an’ I like to fell through the winder, fur he was a-leadin’ by the hand⁠—who do you suppose?”</p>
			<p>“I ’ain’t got a mortal idea who,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Smith, “unless it was Miss Hester, an’ they’re married at last.”</p>
			<p>“No, indeed, ’t wa’n’t her. It was that little Brent boy that his mother died the other day.”</p>
			<p>“Sallie Martin, what air you a-tellin’ me?”</p>
			<p>“It’s the gospel truth, Melviny Smith, as shore as I’m a-settin’ here. Now what does it mean?”</p>
			<p>“The good Lord only knows. Leadin’ that little Brent boy? Ef it wasn’t you a-settin’ there tellin’ me this, Mis’ Martin, I wouldn’t believe it. You don’t suppose Hodges has took him to raise, do you?”</p>
			<p>“How in the name of mercy is he goin’ to raise any child, when there ain’t no women folks about his house ’ceptin’ old Marier, an’ she so blind an’ rheumaticky that she kin sca’cely git about?”</p>
			<p>“Well, what’s he a-doin’ with the child, then?”</p>
			<p>“That’s jest what I’m a-goin’ to find out. I’m a-goin’ down to Miss Prime’s. Len’ me yore shawl, Melviny.”</p>
			<p>“You ain’t never goin’ to dare to ask her, air you?”</p>
			<p>“You jest trust me to find things out without givin’ myself away. I won’t never let her know what I want right out, but I’ll talk it out o’ her.”</p>
			<p>“What a woman you air, Sallie Martin!” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Smith, admiringly. “But do hurry back an’ tell me what she says: I’m jest dyin’ to know.”</p>
			<p>“I’ll be back in little or no time, because I can’t stay, nohow.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Martin threw the borrowed shawl over her head and set off down the street. She and her friend were not dwellers on the mean street, and so they could pretend to so nearly an equal social footing with Miss Prime as to admit of an occasional neighbourly call.</p>
			<p>Through the window Miss Prime saw her visitor approaching, and a grim smile curved the corners of her mouth. “Comin’ fur news,” muttered the spinster. “She’ll git all she wants before she goes.” But there was no trace of suspicion in her manner as she opened the door at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Martin’s rap.</p>
			<p>“Hey oh, Miss Hester, busy as usual, I see.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, indeed. People that try to do their dooty ’ain’t got much time fur rest in this world.”</p>
			<p>“No, indeed; it’s dig, dig, dig, and work, work, work.”</p>
			<p>“Take off yore shawl an’ set down, Sallie. It’s a wonder you don’t take yore death o’ cold or git plum full o’ neuralgy, a-runnin’ around in this weather with nothin’ but a shawl over yore head.”</p>
			<p>“La, Miss Hester, they say that worthless people’s hard to kill. It ain’t allus true, though, fur there was poor Margar’t Brent, she wasn’t worth much, but my! she went out like a match.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, but matches don’t go out until their time ef they’re held down right; an’ it’s jest so with people.”</p>
			<p>“That’s true enough, Miss Hester. Was you to Margar’t’s funeral?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes, I went.”</p>
			<p>“Did you go out to the cimetery?”</p>
			<p>“Oomph huh.”</p>
			<p>“Did she look natural?”</p>
			<p>“Jest as natural as one could expect after a hard life an’ a hard death.”</p>
			<p>“Pore Margar’t!” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Martin sighed. There was a long and embarrassed silence. Miss Prime’s lips were compressed, and she seemed more aggressively busy than usual. She bustled about as if every minute were her last one. She brushed off tables, set chairs to rights, and tried the golden-brown cupcake with a straw to see if it were done. Her visitor positively writhed with curiosity and discomfiture. Finally she began again. “Margar’t only had one child, didn’t she?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, that was all.”</p>
			<p>“Pore little lamb. Motherless childern has a hard time of it.”</p>
			<p>“Indeed, most of ’em do.”</p>
			<p>“Do you know what’s become of the child, Miss Hester?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I do, Sallie Martin, an’ you do too, or you wouldn’t be a-settin’ there beatin’ about the bush, askin’ me all these questions.”</p>
			<p>This sudden outburst gave <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Martin quite a turn, but she exclaimed, “I declare to goodness, Miss Hester, I ’ain’t heerd a livin’ thing about it, only⁠—”</p>
			<p>She checked herself, but her relentless hostess caught at the word and demanded, “Only what, Mis’ Martin?”</p>
			<p>“Well, I seen Brother ’Liphalet Hodges takin’ him away from here in his buggy⁠—”</p>
			<p>“An’ so you come down to see what was what, eh, so’s you could be the first to tell the neighbourhood?”</p>
			<p>“Now, Miss Hester, you know that I ain’t one o’ them that talks, but I do feel sich an interest in the pore motherless child, an’ when I seen Brother Hodges a-takin’ him away, I thought perhaps he was a-goin’ to take him to raise.”</p>
			<p>“Well, Brother Hodges ain’t a-goin’ to take him to raise.”</p>
			<p>“Mercy sakes! Miss Hester, don’t git mad, but who is?”</p>
			<p>“I am, that’s who.”</p>
			<p>“Miss Prime, what air you a-sayin’? You shorely don’t mean it. What kin you do with a child?”</p>
			<p>“I kin train him up in the way he ought to go, an’ keep him out o’ other people’s houses an’ the street.”</p>
			<p>“Well, o’ course, that’s somethin’,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Martin, weakly.</p>
			<p>“Somethin’? Why, it’s everything.”</p>
			<p>The visitor had now gotten the information for which she was looking, and was anxious to be gone. She was absolutely bursting with her news.</p>
			<p>“Well, I must be goin’,” she said, replacing her shawl and standing in embarrassed indecision. “I only run in fur a minute. I hope you ’ain’t got no hard feelin’s at my inquisitiveness.”</p>
			<p>“Not a bit of it. You wanted to know, an’ you come and asked, that’s all.”</p>
			<p>“I hope you’ll git along all right with the child.”</p>
			<p>“I sha’n’t stop at hopin’. I shall take the matter to the Lord in prayer.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, He knows best. Goodbye, Miss Hester.”</p>
			<p>“Goodbye, Sallie; come in ag’in.” The invitation sounded a little bit sarcastic, and once more the grim smile played about Miss Prime’s mouth.</p>
			<p>“I ’low,” she observed to herself, as she took the cake from the oven for the last time, tried it, and set it on the table⁠—“I ’low that I did give Sallie Martin one turn. I never did see sich a woman fur pryin’ into other folks’ business.”</p>
			<p>Swift are the wings of gossip, and swift were the feet of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Sallie Martin as she hurried back to tell the news to her impatient friend, who listened speechless with enjoyment and astonishment.</p>
			<p>“Who would ’a’ thought you could ’a’ talked it out o’ her so?” she gasped.</p>
			<p>“Oh, I led her right along tell she told me everything,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Martin, with a complacency which, remembering her reception, she was far from feeling.</p>
			<p>Shortly after her departure, and while, no doubt, reinforced by <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Smith, she was still watching at the window, ’Liphalet Hodges drove leisurely up to the door again.</p>
			<p>“Well, Freddie,” he said, as he helped the child to alight, “we’ve had a great time together, we have, an’ we ain’t frozen, neither: I told Miss Prime that she needn’t be afeared. Don’t drop yore jumpin’-jack, now, an’ be keerful an’ don’t git yore hands on yore apron, ’cause they’re kind o’ sticky. Miss Hester ’u’d take our heads off ef we come back dirty.”</p>
			<p>The child’s arms were full of toys⁠—a jumping-jack, a climbing monkey, a popgun, and the etceteras of childish amusement⁠—and his pockets and cheeks bulged with candy.</p>
			<p>“La, ’Liphalet,” exclaimed Miss Prime, when she saw them, “what on airth have you been a-buyin’ that child⁠—jumpin’-jacks an’ sich things? They ain’t a bit o’ good, ’ceptin’ to litter up a house an’ put lightness in childern’s minds. Freddie, what’s that on yore apron? Goodness me! an’ look at them hands⁠—candy! ’Liphalet Hodges, I did give you credit fur better jedgment than this. Candy is the cause o’ more aches an’ pains than poison; an’ some of it’s reelly coloured with ars’nic. How do you expect a child to grow up healthy an’ with sound teeth when you feed him on candy?”</p>
			<p>“Now, Miss Hester, now, now, now. I don’t want to be a-interferin’ with yore bus’ness; but it’s jest like I said before, an’ I will stick to it, you ’ain’t never had no experunce in raisin’ children. They can’t git along jest on meat an’ bread an’ jam: they need candy⁠—an’⁠—ah⁠—candy⁠—an’ sich things.” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hodges ended lamely, looking rather guiltily at the boy’s bulging pockets. “A little bit ain’t a-goin’ to hurt no child.”</p>
			<p>“ ’Liphalet, I’ve got a dooty to perform towards this motherless child, an’ I ain’t a-goin’ to let no foolish notions keep me from performin’ it.”</p>
			<p>“Miss Hester, I’m a-tryin’ to follow Him that was a father to the fatherless an’ a husband to the widow⁠—strange, that was made only to the widow⁠—an’ I’ve got somethin’ of a idee o’ dooty myself. You may think I’m purty presumptuous, but I’ve took a notion into my head to kind o’ help along a-raisin’ Freddie. I ain’t a-goin’ to question yore authority, or nothin’, but I thought mebbe you’d len’ me the child once in a while to kind o’ lighten up that old lonesome place o’ mine: I know that Freddie won’t object.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, ’Liphalet, do go ’long: I scarcely know whether you air a man or a child, sometimes.”</p>
			<p>“There’s One that says, ‘Except you become as a little child’⁠—”</p>
			<p>“ ’Liphalet, will you go ’long home?”</p>
			<p>“I’spect I’d better be gittin’ along.⁠—Goodbye, Freddie; be a good boy, an’ some day I’ll take you up to my house an’ let you ride old Bess around.⁠—Goodbye, Miss Hester.” And as he passed out to his buggy he whistled tenderly something that was whistled when he was a boy.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
