<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-13" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><span epub:type="label">Chapter</span> <span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</span></h2>
			<p>As Brent thought of the long struggle before him, he began to wish that there might be something organically wrong with him which the shock would irritate into fatal illness. But even while he thought this he sneered at himself for the weakness. A weakness self-confessed holds the possibility of strength. So in a few days he rallied and took up the burden of his life again. As before he had found relief in study, now he stilled his pains and misgivings by a strict attention to the work which his place involved.</p>
			<p>His was not an easy position for a young man. He had to go through the ordeal of pastoral visits. He had to condole with old ladies who thought a preacher had nothing else to do than to listen to the recital of their ailments. He had to pray with poor and stricken families whose conditions reminded him strongly of what his own must have been. He had to speak words of serious admonition to girls nearly his own age, who thought it great fun and giggled in his face. All this must he do, nor must he slight a single convention. No rules of conduct are so rigid as are those of a provincial town. He who ministers to the people must learn their prejudices and be adroit enough not to offend them or strong enough to break them down. It was a great load to lay on the shoulders of so young a man. But habit is everything, and he soon fell into the ways of his office. Writing to Taylor, he said, “I am fairly harnessed now, and at work, and, although the pulling is somewhat hard, I know my way. It is wonderful how soon a man falls into the cant of his position and learns to dole out the cut-and-dried phrases of ministerial talk like a sort of spiritual phonograph. I must confess, though, that I am rather good friends with the children who come to my Sunday-school. My own experiences as a child are so fresh in my memory that I rather sympathise with the little fellows, and do all I can to relieve the half-scared stiffness with which they conduct themselves in church and the Sunday-school room.</p>
			<p>“I wonder why it is we make church such a place of terror to the young ones. No wonder they quit coming as soon as they can choose.</p>
			<p>“I shock Miss Simpson, who teaches a mixed class, terribly, by my freedom with the pupils. She says that she can’t do anything with her charges any more; but I notice that her class and the school are growing. I ‘ve been at it for several weeks now, and, like a promising baby, I am beginning to take an interest in things.</p>
			<p>“If I got on with the old children of my flock as well as I do with the young ones, I should have nothing to complain of; but I don’t. They know as little as the youngsters, and are a deal more unruly. They are continually comparing me with their old pastor, and it is needless to say that I suffer by the comparison. The ex-pastor himself burdens me with advice. I shall tell him some day that he has resigned. But I am growing diplomatic, and have several reasons for not wishing to offend him. For all which ‘shop’ pray forgive me.”</p>
			<p>One of the reasons for not wishing to offend the Rev. Mr. Simpson of which Brent wrote was, as may be readily inferred, his engagement to Elizabeth. It had not yet officially become public property, but few of Dexter’s observant and forecasting people who saw them together doubted for a moment that it would be a match. Indeed, some spiteful people in the community, who looked on from the outside, said that “Mr. Simpson never thought of resigning until he saw that he could keep the place in the family.” But of course they were Baptists who said this, or Episcopalians, or Presbyterians⁠—some such unregenerate lot.</p>
			<p>Contrary to the adage, the course of love between the young people did run smooth. The young minister had not disagreed with the older one, so Elizabeth had not disagreed with him, because she did not have to take sides. She was active in the Sunday-school and among the young people’s societies, and Brent thought that she would make an ideal minister’s wife. Every Sunday, after church, they walked home together, and sometimes he would stop at the house for a meal. They had agreed that at the end of his first pastoral year they would be married; and both parent and guardian smiled on the prospective union.</p>
			<p>As his beloved young friend seemed to grow more settled and contented, Eliphalet Hodges waxed more buoyant in the joy of his hale old age, and his wife, all her ambitions satisfied, grew more primly genial every day.</p>
			<p>Brent found his congregation increasing, and heard himself spoken of as a popular preacher. Under these circumstances, it would seem that there was nothing to be desired to make him happy. But he was not so, though he kept an unruffled countenance. He felt the repression that his position put upon him. He prayed that with time it might pass off, but this prayer was not answered. There were times when, within his secret closet, the contemplation of the dead level of his life, as it spread out before him, drove him almost to madness.</p>
			<p>The bitterness in his heart against his father had not abated one jot, and whenever these spasms of discontent would seize him he was wont to tell himself, “I am fighting old Tom Brent now, and I must conquer him.”</p>
			<p>Thus nearly a year passed away, and he was beginning to think of asking Elizabeth to name the day. He had his eye upon a pretty little nest of a house, sufficiently remote from her father’s, and he was looking forward to settling quietly down in a home of his own.</p>
			<p>It was about this time that, as he sat alone one evening in the little chamber which was his study and bedroom in one, Mr. Simpson entered and opened conversation with him.</p>
			<p>For some time a rumour which did violence to the good name of Sophy Davis had been filtering through the community. But it had only filtered, until the girl’s disappearance a day or two before had allowed the gossips to talk openly, and great was the talk. The young minister had looked on and listened in silence. He had always known and liked Sophy, and if what the gossips said of her was true, he pitied the girl.</p>
			<p>On this particular evening it was plain that Mr. Simpson had come to talk about the affair. After some preliminary remarks, he said, “You have a great chance, dear Brother Brent, for giving the devil in this particular part of the moral vineyard a hard blow.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t clearly see why now, more than before,” returned Brent.</p>
			<p>“Because you are furnished with a living example of the fruits of evil: don’t you see?”</p>
			<p>“If there is such an example furnished, the people will see it for themselves, and I should be doing a thankless task to point it out to them. I would rather show people the beauty of good than the ugliness of evil.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, that ‘s the milk-and-water new style of preaching.”</p>
			<p>“Well, we all have our opinions, to be sure, but I think it rather a good style.” Brent was provokingly nonchalant, and his attitude irritated the elder man.</p>
			<p>“We won’t discuss that: we will be practical. I came to advise you to hold Sophy Davis up in church next Sunday as a fearful example of evil-doing. You need n’t mention any names, but you can make it strong and plain enough.”</p>
			<p>Brent flushed angrily. “Are there not enough texts in here,” he asked, laying his hand upon the Bible, “that I can cite and apply, without holding up a poor weak mortal to the curiosity, scorn, and derision of her equally weak fellows?”</p>
			<p>“But it is your duty as a Christian and a preacher of the gospel to use this warning.”</p>
			<p>“I do not need to kick a falling girl to find examples to warn people from sin; and as for duty, I think that each man best knows his own.”</p>
			<p>“Then you are n’t going to do it?”</p>
			<p>“No,” the young man burst forth. “I am a preacher of the gospel, not a clerical gossip!”</p>
			<p>“Do you mean that I am a gossip?”</p>
			<p>“I was not thinking of you.”</p>
			<p>“Let me preach for you, Sunday.”</p>
			<p>“I will not do that either. I will not let my pulpit be debased by anything which I consider so low as this business.”</p>
			<p>“You will not take advice, then?”</p>
			<p>“Not such as that.”</p>
			<p>“Be careful, Frederick Brent. I gave you that pulpit, and I can take it away⁠—I that know who you are and what you come from.”</p>
			<p>“The whole town knows what you know, so I do not care for that. As for taking my pulpit from me, you may do that when you please. You put it upon me by force, and by force you may take it; but while I am pastor there I shall use my discretion in all matters of this kind.”</p>
			<p>“Sophy ‘s been mighty quiet in her devilment. She does n’t accuse anybody. Maybe you ‘ve got more than one reason for shielding her.”</p>
			<p>Brent looked into the man’s eyes and read his meaning; then he arose abruptly and opened the door.</p>
			<p>“I ‘m not accusing⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Go,” said the young man hoarsely. His face was white, and his teeth were hard set.</p>
			<p>“You ‘ll learn some respect for your elders yet, if⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Go!” Brent repeated, and he took a step towards his visitor. Mr. Simpson looked startled for a moment, but he glanced back into the young man’s face and then passed hurriedly out of the room.</p>
			<p>Brent let two words slip between his clenched teeth: “The hound!”</p>
			<p>No one knew what had passed between the young pastor and Mr. Simpson, but many mutterings and head-shakings of the latter indicated that all was not right. No one knew? Perhaps that is hardly correct, for on Sunday, the sermon over, when Brent looked to find Elizabeth in her usual place whence they walked home together, she was gone. He bit his lip and passed on alone, but it rankled within him that she had so easily believed ill of him.</p>
			<p>But he had not seen the last of the Rev. Mr. Simpson’s work. It was the right of five members of the congregation to call a church-meeting, and when he returned for service in the evening he found upon the pulpit the written request for such an assembly to be held on Tuesday night. Heading the list of members was the name of the former pastor, although this was not needed to tell the young man that it was his work. In anger he gave out the notice and went on with his duties.</p>
			<p>“Somethin’ must ’a’ riled you to-night, Fred,” said Eliphalet when church was out. “You give ’em a mighty stirrin’ touch o’ fire. It ‘minded me o’ that old supply sermon.” Brent smiled mirthlessly. He knew that the same feelings had inspired both efforts.</p>
			<p>On Tuesday evening he was early at church, and in the chair, as was the pastor’s place. Early as he was, he did not much precede Mr. Simpson, who came in, followed by a coterie of his choicest spirits.</p>
			<p>When the assembly had been duly called to order, Brent asked, “Will some one now please state the object of this meeting?”</p>
			<p>Mr. Simpson arose.</p>
			<p>“Brothers and sisters,” he said, “the object of this meeting is a very simple one. From the time that I began to preach in this church, twenty-five years ago, we had purity and cleanness in the pulpit and in the pew.”</p>
			<p>Brent’s eyes were flashing. Eliphalet Hodges, who had thought that the extra session was for some routine business, pricked up his ears.</p>
			<p>Simpson proceeded: “One in this flock has lately gone astray: she has fallen into evil ways⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Brother Simpson,” interrupted Brent, his face drawn and hard with anger, “will you state the object of this meeting?”</p>
			<p>“If the pastor is not afraid to wait, he will see that that is what I am doing.”</p>
			<p>“Then you are bringing into the church matters that have no business here.”</p>
			<p>“We shall see about that. We intend to investigate and see why you refused to hold up as a warning one of the sinners of this connection. We propose to ask whom you were shielding⁠—a sinner in the pew, or a sinner in the pulpit as well. We propose⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Stop!” The young man’s voice broke out like the report of a rifle. “Stop, I say, or, as God sees me, here in His temple, at His very altar, I will do you violence. I speak to you not as your pastor, but as a man: not as an accused man, for you dare not accuse me.”</p>
			<p>The church was in a commotion. In all its long history, such a scene had never before been enacted within the sacred walls. The men sat speechless; the women shrank far down into their seats. Only those two men, the young and the old, stood glaring into each other’s faces.</p>
			<p>“Remember, brethren,” said someone, recovering himself, “that this is the house of God, and that you are preachers of the gospel.”</p>
			<p>“I do remember that it is God’s house, and for that reason I will not let it be disgraced by scandal that would stain the lowest abode of vice. I do remember that I am a preacher, and for that reason I will not see the gospel made vindictive⁠—a scourge to whip down a poor girl, who may have sinned⁠—I know not⁠—but who, if she did, has an advocate with God. Once before in this place have I told you my opinion of your charity and your love. Once before have I branded you as mockeries of the idea of Christianity. Now I say to you, you are hypocrites. You are like carrion birds who soar high up in the ether for a while and then swoop down to revel in filth and rottenness. The stench of death is sweet to you. Putridity is dear to you. As for you who have done this work, you need pity. Your own soul must be reeking with secret foulness to be so basely suspicious. Your own eyes must have cast unholy glances to so soon accuse the eyes of others. As for the thing which you, mine enemy, have intimated here to-night, as pastor of this church I scorn to make defence. But as a man I say, give such words as those breath again, and I will forget your age and only remember your infamy. I see the heads of some about me here wagging, some that knew my father. I hear their muffled whispers, and I know what they are saying. I know what is in their hearts. You are saying that it is the old Tom Brent in me showing itself at last. Yes, it has smouldered in me long, and I am glad. I think better of that spirit because it was waked into life to resent meanness. I would rather be the most roistering drunkard that ever reeled down these streets than call myself a Christian and carouse over the dead characters of my fellows.</p>
			<p>“To-night I feel for the first time that I am myself. I give you back gladly what you have given me. I am no longer your pastor. We are well quit. Even while I have preached to you, I have seen in your hearts your scorn and your distrust, and I have hated you in secret. But I throw off the cloak. I remove the disguise. Here I stand stripped of everything save the fact that I am a man; and I despise you openly. Yes, old Tom, drunken Tom Brent’s son despises you. Go home. Go home. There may be work for your stench-loving nostrils there.”</p>
			<p>He stood like an avenging spirit, pointing towards the door, and the people who had sat there breathless through it all rose quietly and slipped out. Simpson joined them and melted into the crowd. They were awed and hushed.</p>
			<p>Only Mrs. Hodges, white as death, and her husband, bowed with grief, remained. A silent party, they walked home together. Not until they were in the house did the woman break down, and then she burst into a storm of passionate weeping as if the pent-up tears of all her stoical life were flowing at once.</p>
			<p>“Oh, Fred, Fred,” she cried between her sobs, “I see it all now. I was wrong. I was wrong. But I did it all fur the best. The Lord knows I did it fur the best.”</p>
			<p>“I know you did, Aunt Hester, but I wish you could have seen sooner, before the bitterness of death had come into my life.” He felt strangely hard and cold. Her grief did not affect him then.</p>
			<p>“Don’t take on so, Hester,” said the old man, but the woman continued to rock herself to and fro and moan, “I did it fur the best, I did it fur the best.” The old man took her in his arms, and after a while she grew more calm, only her sobs breaking the silence.</p>
			<p>“I shall go away to-morrow,” said Brent. “I am going out into the world for myself. I ‘ve been a disgrace to every one connected with me.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t say that about yoreself, Fred; I ain’t a-goin’ to hear it,” said Eliphalet. “You ‘ve jest acted as any right-thinkin’ man would ’a’ acted. It would n’t ’a’ been right fur you to ’a’ struck Brother Simpson, but I ‘m nearer his age, an’ my hands itched to git a hold o’ him.” The old man looked menacing, and his fist involuntarily clenched.</p>
			<p>“ ‘Liphalet,” said his wife, “I ‘ve been a-meddlin’ with the business o’ Providence, an’ I ‘ve got my jest <ins class="correction" title="original reads: deserts">desserts</ins>. I thought I knowed jest what He wanted me to do, an’ I was more ignorant than a child. Furgive me ef you kin, Fred, my boy. I was tryin’ to make a good man o’ you.”</p>
			<p>“There ‘s nothing for me to forgive, Aunt Hester. I ‘m sorry I ‘ve spoiled your plans.”</p>
			<p>“I ‘m glad, fur mebbe God ‘ll have a chance now to work His own plans. But pore little ‘Lizabeth!”</p>
			<p>Brent’s heart hurt him as he heard the familiar name, and he turned abruptly and went to his room. Once there, he had it out with himself. “But,” he told himself, “if I had the emergency to meet again, I should do the same thing.”</p>
			<p>The next morning’s mail brought him a little packet in which lay the ring he had given Elizabeth to plight their troth.</p>
			<p>“I thank you for this,” he said. “It makes my way easier.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
