<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><span epub:type="label">Chapter</span> <span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</span></h2>
			<p>It was not until early in Brent’s second year at the Bible Seminary that he was compelled to go through the ordeal he so much dreaded, that of filling a city pulpit. The Dexterites had been wont to complain that since the advent among them of the theological school their churches had been turned into recitation-rooms for the raw students; but of “old Tom Brent’s boy,” as they still called him, they could never make this complaint. So, as humanity loves to grumble, the congregations began to find fault because he did not do as his fellows did.</p>
			<p>The rumours of his prowess in the class-room and his eloquence in the society hall had not abated, and the curiosity of his fellow-townsmen had been whetted to a point where endurance was no longer possible. Indeed, it is open to question whether it was not by connivance of the minister himself, backed by his trustees on one side and the college authorities on the other, that Brent was finally deputed to supply the place of the Rev. Mr. Simpson, who was affected by an indisposition, fancied, pretended, or otherwise.</p>
			<p>The news struck the young man like a thunderbolt, albeit he had been expecting it. He attempted to make his usual excuse, but the kindly old professor who had notified him smiled into his face, and, patting his shoulder, said, “It ‘s no use, Brent. I ‘d go and make the best of it; they ‘re bound to have you. I understand your diffidence in the matter, and, knowing how well you stand in class, it does credit to your modesty.”</p>
			<p>The old man passed on. He said he understood, but in his heart the young student standing there helpless, hopeless, knew that he did not understand, that he could not. Only he himself could perceive it in all the trying horror of its details. Only he himself knew fully or could know what the event involved⁠—that when he arose to preach, to nine-tenths of the congregation he would not be Frederick Brent, student, but “old Tom Brent’s boy.” He recoiled from the thought.</p>
			<p>Many a fireside saint has said, “Why did not Savonarola tempt the hot ploughshares? God would not have let them burn him.” Faith is a beautiful thing. But Savonarola had the ploughshares at his feet. The children of Israel stepped into the Red Sea before the waters parted, but then Moses was with them, and, what was more, Pharaoh was behind them.</p>
			<p>At home, the intelligence of what Brent was to do was received in different manner by Mrs. Hodges and her husband. The good lady launched immediately into a lecture on the duty that was placed in his hands; but Eliphalet was silent as they sat at the table. He said nothing until after supper was over, and then he whispered to his young friend as he started to his room, “I know jest how you feel, Freddie. It seems that I ought n’t to call you that now; but I ‘low you ‘ll allus be ‘Freddie’ to me.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t ever call me anything else, if you please, Uncle ‘Liph,” said the young man, pressing Eliphalet’s hand.</p>
			<p>“I think I kin understand you better than most people,” Mr. Hodges went on; “an’ I know it ain’t no easy task that you ‘ve got before you.”</p>
			<p>“You ‘ve always understood me better than any one, and⁠—and I wish you knew what it has meant to me, and that I could thank you somehow.”</p>
			<p>“ ‘Sh, my boy. It ‘s thanks enough to hear them words from you. Now you jest calm yoreself, an’ when Sunday comes⁠—I don’t know as I ‘d ought to say it this way, but I mean it all in a Christian sperrit⁠—when Sunday comes, Freddie, my boy, you jest go in an’ give ’em fits.”</p>
			<p>The two parted with another pressure of the hand, and it must be confessed that the old man looked a little bit sheepish when his wife hoped he had been giving Fred good advice.</p>
			<p>“You don’t reckon, Hester, that I ‘d give him any other kind, do you?”</p>
			<p>“Not intentionally, ‘Liphalet; but when it comes to advice, there ‘s p’ints o’ view.” Mrs. Hodges seemed suspicious of her husband’s capabilities as an adviser.</p>
			<p>“There ‘s some times when people ‘d a good deal ruther have sympathy than advice.”</p>
			<p>“An’ I reckon, ‘cordin’ to yore way o’ thinkin’ this is one o’ them. Well, I intend to try to do my dooty in this matter, as I ‘ve tried to do it all along.”</p>
			<p>“Hester, yore dooty ‘ll kill you yit. It ‘s a wonder you don’t git tired a-lookin’ it in the face.”</p>
			<p>“I ain’t a-goin’ to shirk it, jest to live in pleasure an’ ease.”</p>
			<p>“No need o’ shirkin’, Hester, no need o’ shirkin’; but they ‘s some people that would n’t be content without rowin’ down stream.”</p>
			<p>“An’ then, mind you, ‘Liphalet, I ain’t a-exchangin’ words with you, fur that ‘s idleness, but there ‘s others, that would n’t row up stream, but ’ud wait an’ hope fur a wind to push ’em.” These impersonalities were as near “spatting” as Mr. and Mrs. Hodges ever got.</p>
			<p>Through all the community that clustered about Mr. Simpson’s church and drew its thoughts, ideas, and subjects of gossip therefrom, ran like wildfire the news that at last they were to have a chance to judge of young Brent’s merits for themselves. It caused a stir among old and young, and in the days preceding the memorable Sunday little else was talked of.</p>
			<p>When it reached the ears of old Dan’l Hastings, who limped around now upon two canes, but was as acrimonious as ever, he exclaimed, tapping the ground with one of his sticks for emphasis, “What! that young Brent preachin’ in our church, in our minister’s pulpit! It ‘s a shame⁠—an’ he the born son of old Tom Brent, that all the town knows was the worst sinner hereabouts. I ain’t a-goin’ to go; I ain’t a-goin’ to go.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t you be afeared to go, Dan’l: there ain’t no danger that his docterns air a-goin’ to be as strong as his father’s whisky,” said his old enemy.</p>
			<p>“Oh, it ‘s fur the likes o’ you, Thomas Donaldson, to be a-talkin’ o’ docterns an’ whisky in the same breath. You never did have no reverence,” said the old man, testily.</p>
			<p>“An’ yet, Dan’l, I ‘ve found docterns an’ whisky give out by the same breath.”</p>
			<p>Mr. Hastings did not think it necessary to notice this remark. He went on with his tirade against the prospective “supply:” “Why can’t Elder Simpson preach hisself, I ‘d like to know, instead o’ puttin’ up that young upstart to talk to his betters? Why, I mind the time that that boy had to be took out o’ church by the hand fur laffin’ at me⁠—at <em>me</em>, mind you,” the old man repeated, shaking his stick; “laffin’ at me when I was expoundin’ the word.”</p>
			<p>“That ‘s ter’ble, Dan’l; fur, as fur as I kin ricollec’, when you ‘re a-expoundin’ the word it ain’t no laffin’ matter.”</p>
			<p>“I tell you, Thomas Donaldson, the world ‘s a-goin’ down hill fast: but I ain’t a-goin’ to help it along. I ain’t a-goin’ to hear that Brent boy preach.”</p>
			<p>This declaration, however, did not prevent the venerable Dan’l from being early in his seat on the following Sunday morning, sternly, uncompromisingly critical.</p>
			<p>As might have been expected, the church was crowded. Friends, enemies, and the merely curious filled the seats and blocked the aisles. The chapel had been greatly enlarged to accommodate its growing congregation, but on this day it was totally inadequate to hold the people who flocked to its doors.</p>
			<p>The Rev. Mr. Simpson was so far recovered from his indisposition as to be able to be present and assist at the service. Elizabeth was there, looking proud and happy and anxious. Mrs. Hodges was in her accustomed place on the ladies’ side of the pulpit. She had put new strings to her bonnet in honour of the occasion. Her face wore a look of great severity. An unregenerate wag in the back part of the church pointed her out to his companions and remarked that she looked as if she ‘d spank the preacher if he did n’t do well. “Poor fellow, if he sees that face he ‘ll break down, sure.” Opposite, in the “amen corner,” the countenance of the good Eliphalet was a study in changing expressions. It was alternately possessed by fear, doubt, anxiety, and exultation.</p>
			<p>Sophy Davis sat in a front seat, spick and span in a new dress, which might have been made for the occasion. People said that she was making eyes at her young fellow-salesman, though she was older than he. Mrs. Martin and her friend whispered together a little farther back.</p>
			<p>A short time before the service began, Brent entered by a side door near the pulpit and ascended to his place. His entrance caused a marked sensation. His appearance was impressive. The youthful face was white and almost rigid in its lines. “Scared to death,” was the mental note of a good many who saw him. But his step was firm. As Elizabeth looked at him, she felt proud that such a man loved her. He was not handsome. His features were irregular, but his eyes were clear and fearless. If a certain cowardice had held him back from this ordeal, it was surely not because he trembled for himself. The life he had lived and the battles he had fought had given a compression to his lips that corrected a natural tendency to weakness in his mouth. His head was set squarely on his broad shoulders. He was above medium height, but not loosely framed. He looked the embodiment of strength.</p>
			<p>“He ain’t a bit like his father,” said some one.</p>
			<p>“He ‘s like his father was in his best days,” replied another.</p>
			<p>“He don’t look like he ‘s over-pleased with the business. They say he did n’t want to come.”</p>
			<p>“Well, I guess it ‘s purty resky work gittin’ up to speak before all these people that ‘s knowed him all his life, an’ know where an’ what he come from.”</p>
			<p>“They say, too, that he ‘s some pumpkins out at the college.”</p>
			<p>“I ‘ain’t much faith in these school-made preachers; but we’ ll soon see what he kin do in the pulpit. We ‘ve heerd preachers, an’ we kin compare.”</p>
			<p>“That ‘s so: we ‘ve heerd some preachers in our day. He must toe the mark. He may be all right at college, but he ‘s in a pulpit now that has held preachers fur shore. A pebble ‘s all right among pebbles, but it looks mighty small ‘longside o’ boulders. He ‘s preachin’ before people now. Why, Brother Simpson himself never would ’a’ got a special dispensation to hold the church all these years, ef it had n’t been fur the people backin’ him up an’ Conference was afraid they ‘d leave the connection.”</p>
			<p>“Well, ef this boy is anything, Lord only knows where he gets it, fur everybody knows⁠—”</p>
			<p>“ ‘Sh!”</p>
			<p>The buzz which had attended the young speaker’s entrance subsided as Mr. Simpson rose and gave out the hymn. That finished, he ran his eyes over the front seats of the assembly and then said, “Brother Hastings, lead us in prayer.”</p>
			<p>The old man paused for an instant as if surprised, and then got slowly to his knees. It was a strange selection, but we have seen that this particular parson was capable of doing strange things. In the course of a supplication of some fifteen minutes’ duration, Brother Hastings managed to vent his spleen upon the people and to pay the Lord a few clumsy compliments. During the usual special blessing which is asked upon the preacher of the hour, he prayed, “O Lord, let not the rarin’ horses of his youth run away with Thy chariot of eternal truth. Lord, cool his head and warm his heart and settle him firm. Grant that he may fully realise where he ‘s a-standin’ at, an’ who he ‘s a-speakin’ to. Do Thou not let <em>him</em> speak, but speak through him, that Thy gospel may be preached to-day as Thy prophets of old preached it.”</p>
			<p>Throughout the prayer, but one thought was running through Frederick Brent’s mind, and his heart was crying in its anguish, “Oh, my God, my God, why do they hound me so?”</p>
			<p>It is a terrible thing, this first effort before the home people, especially when home has not been kind.</p>
			<p>When he arose to meet the people’s eyes, his face was haggard and he felt weak. But unflinchingly he swept his eyes over the crowd, and that instant’s glance brought before him all the panorama of the past years. There before him was the sneaking Billy Tompkins, now grown to the maturity of being called “Bill.” Then there was Dan’l Hastings. Oh, that night, years ago, when he had been marched up the aisle with crimson face! In one brief second he lived it all over again, the shame, the disgrace, the misery of it. There, severe, critical, expectant, sat his guardian, the master-hand who had manipulated all the machinery of his life. All this passed through his mind in a flash, as he stood there facing the people. His face changed. The haggard look passed away. His eyes kindled, his cheeks mantled. Even in the pulpit, even in the house of God, about to speak His word, the blood sped hotly through his veins, and anger burned at his heart. But he crushed down his feelings for the moment, and began in a clear ringing voice, “Judge not, that ye be not judged. For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged, and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again.” The lesson he drew from the words was God’s recognition of the fallibility of human judgment, and the self-condemnation brought about by ignoring the prohibition in the text. By an effort, he spoke deliberately at first, but the fire in his heart came out more and more in his words as he progressed. “Blinded by our own prejudices,” he said, “circumscribed by our own ignorance, we dare to set ourselves up as censors of our fellow-men. Unable to see the whole chain of life which God has forged, we take a single link and say that it is faulty. Too narrow to see His broad plan, we take a patch of it and say, ‘This is not good.’ There is One who works even through evil that good may come, but we take the sin of our brother, and, without seeing or knowing what went before it or shall come after, condemn him. What false, blind, petty judges we are! You women who are condemning your fallen sisters, you men who are execrating your sinful brothers, if Christ to-day were to command, ‘Let him who is without sin cast the first stone,’ look into your own hearts and answer me, how many of you would dare to lift a hand? How many of you have taken the beam out of your own eye before attempting to pluck the mote out of your brother’s? O ye pharisaical ones, who stand in the public places and thank God that you are not as other men, beware, beware. The condemnation that surely and inevitably shall fall upon you is not the judgment of Jesus Christ. It is not the sentence of the Father. It is your own self-condemnation, without charity, without forbearance, without love; ‘for with what judgment ye judge ye shall be judged.’</p>
			<p>“Stand by the wayside if you will. Draw aside your skirts in the vainglory of self-righteousness from the passing multitude. Say to each other, if you will, ‘This woman is a sinner: this man is a criminal.’ Close your eyes against their acts of repentance, harden your hearts against their pleas for forgiveness, withhold mercy and pardon and charity; but I tell you of One who has exalted charity into the highest and best of virtues. I bring you the message of One whose judgment is tempered by divine love. He is seeing you. He is hearing you. Over the parapets of high heaven the gentle Father leans waiting to take into His soul any breath of human love or charity which floats up to Him from this sin-parched world. What have you done to merit His approval? Have you been kind, or have you been hard? Have you been gentle, or have you been harsh? Have you been charitable, or have you hunted out all the evil and closed your eyes to all the good? You have forgotten, O ye of little faith, you have forgotten, you without charity in your hearts, and you who claim to follow Christ and yet have no love for your fellows⁠—you have forgotten that God is a God of wrath as well as of love; that Christ hath anger as well as pity; that He who holds the hyssop of divine mercy holds also the scourge of divine indignation. You have forgotten that the lash you so love to wield over your brother’s back shall be laid upon your own by Him who whipped the money-changers from His temple. Listen! The day shall come when the condemnation you are accumulating against yourselves shall overwhelm you. Stop trying to steal the prerogative of heaven. Judge not. God only is just!”</p>
			<p>The silence throughout the sermon was intense. During the closing words which have been quoted, it was like a presence in the chapel. The voice of the preacher rang out like a clarion. His eyes looked before him as if he saw into the future. His hand was uplifted as if he would call down upon them the very judgment which he predicted.</p>
			<p>Without more words he sat down. No one moved or spoke for an instant. Dan’l Hastings let his cane fall upon the floor. It echoed through the silent place with a crash. Some of the women started and half cried out; but the spell was now partly broken. Mr. Simpson suddenly remembered to pray, and the gossips forgot to whisper when their heads were bowed. There were some pale faces in the crowd, and some which the galling of tears had made red. There was in the atmosphere something of the same tense silence that follows a terrific thunder-clap. And so the service ended, and the people filed out of church silent still. Some few remained behind to shake the preacher’s hand, but as soon as the benediction was over he hurried out the side door, and, before any one could intercept him, was on his way home. But he left a willing substitute. Mrs. Hodges accepted all his congratulations with complacent condescension.</p>
			<p>“Dan’l,” said Thomas Donaldson, as he helped the old man down the church steps, “I was mistaken about the docterns an’ the whisky. It was stronger an’ better, because it was the pure stuff.”</p>
			<p>“I ‘ain’t got a word to say,” said Dan’l, “ ‘ceptin’ that a good deal of it was jest sass.” But he kept mumbling to himself as he hobbled along, “Jedge not, fur you ‘re a-pilin’ up sentences on yoreself. I never thought of it that way before; no, I never.”</p>
			<p>Brent did not come out of his room to dinner that afternoon. Mrs. Hodges was for calling him, but the old man objected. “No, Hester,” he said, “Freddie jest wants to be let alone. He ‘s a-feelin’ now.”</p>
			<p>“But, ‘Liphalet, he ought to know how nice people talked about his sermon. I tell you that was my kind o’ doctern. It ‘s wonderful how a child will learn.”</p>
			<p>Notwithstanding his belief that his young friend wanted to be left alone, the old man slipped into his room later on with a cup of tea. The young man sat before the table, his head buried in his hands. Eliphalet set the cup and saucer down and turned to go, but he paused at the door and said, “Thank the Lord fur the way you give it to ’em, Freddie. It was worth a dollar.” He would have hurried out, but the young man sprang up and seized his hand, exclaiming, “It was wrong, Uncle ‘Liph, it was wrong of me. I saw them sitting about me like jackals waiting for their prey; I remembered all that I had been and all that I was; I knew what they were thinking, and I was angry, angry. God forgive me! That sermon was preached from as hot a heart as ever did murder.”</p>
			<p>The old man stroked the young one’s hair as he would a child’s. “Never mind,” he said. “It don’t matter what you felt. That ‘s between you an’ Him. I only know what you said, an’ that ‘s all I care about. Did n’t you speak about the Lord a-whippin’ the money-changers from the temple? Ain’t lots o’ them worse than the money-changers? Was n’t Christ divine? Ain’t you human? Would a body expect you to feel less’n He did? Huh! jest don’t you worry; remember that you did n’t hit a head that was n’t in striking distance.” And the old man pressed the boy back into his chair and slipped out.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
